The Bomoo.com Ebook of English Series
Antoine de Saint-Exupér y
The L ittle Princ e
2003 . 7
ANNOUNCEMENT
This ebook is designed and produced by Bomoo.com, which collected the
content from Internet. You can distribute it free, but any business use and any
edit are prohibited. The original author is the copyright holder of all relating
contents. You are encouraged to send us error messages and suggestions about
this ebook to mail@bomoo.com. More materials can be found at the site
http://www.bomoo.com.
The America Edition’s Cover
SAINT-EXUPÉRY, Antoine de
(1900-44). An adventurous pilot
and a lyrical poet, Antoine de
Saint-Exupéry conveyed in his
books the solitude and mystic
grandeur of the early days of
flight. He described dangerous
adventures in the skies and also
wrote the whimsical children's
fable 'The Little Prince'.
Antoine-Marie-Roger de
Saint-Exupéry was born on June
29, 1900, in Lyon, France. In
the 1920s he helped establish
airmail routes overseas. During
World War II he flew as a
military reconnaissance pilot.
After the Germans occupied
France in 1940, he escaped to
the United States. He rejoined
the air force in North Africa in
1943. During what was to have
been his final reconnaissance
mission over the Mediterranean
Sea, he died when his plane was shot down on July 31, 1944.
Saint-Exupery's first book, 'Southern Mail', was about the life and death of an airmail pilot.
It was published in French in 1929. Other books include 'Night Flight' (1931), about the first
airline pilots, and 'Wind, Sand, and Stars' (1939), in which he describes his feelings during
flights over the desert.
'The Little Prince' (1943), which in a way is really a children's book for grown-ups, was
written during Saint-Exupery's stay in the United States. A gentle and thoughtful book, it
tells the story of a boy who lives alone on a tiny planet.
A final volume of reflections, which provides an insight into the author's views on the
meaning of life, is 'The Wisdom of the Sands' (1948). This book was published after the
pilot's death.
-- From Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia
1
Contents
Chapter 1 we are introduced to the narrator, a pilot, and his
ideas about grown-ups...........................................4
Chapter 2 the narrator crashes in the desert and makes the
acquaintance of the little prince ............................6
Chapter 3 the narrator learns more about from where the
little prince came .................................................10
Chapter 4 the narrator speculates as to which asteroid from
which the little prince came.................................12
Chapter 5 we are warned as to the dangers of the baobabs.16
Chapter 6 the little prince and the narrator talk about sunsets
.............................................................................20
Chapter 7 the narrator learns about the secret of the little
prince's life ..........................................................22
Chapter 8 the rose arrives at the little prince's planet.........25
Chapter 9 the little prince leaves his planet.........................29
Chapter 10 the little prince visits the king............................31
Chapter 11 the little prince visits the conceited man............36
Chapter 12 the little prince visits the tippler........................38
Chapter 13 the little prince visits the businessman..............40
2
Chapter 14 the little prince visits the lamplighter................44
Chapter 15 the little prince visits the geographer................47
Chapter 16 the narrator discusses the Earth's lamplighters 51
Chapter 18 the little prince goes looking for men and meets a
flower...................................................................55
Chapter 19 the little prince climbs a mountain range..........56
Chapter 19 the little prince climbs a mountain range..........56
Chapter 20 the little prince discovers a garden of roses......58
Chapter 21 the little prince befriends the fox.......................60
Chapter 22 the little prince encounters a railway switchman
.............................................................................66
Chapter 23 the little prince encounters a merchant.............68
Chapter 24 the narrator and the little prince, thirsty, hunt for
a well in the desert...............................................69
Chapter 25 finding a well, the narrator and the little prince
discuss his return to his planet ............................72
Chapter 26 the little prince converses with the snake; the
little prince consoles the narrator; the little prince
returns to his planet.............................................76
Chapter 27 the narrator's afterthoughts...............................84
3
To Leon Werth
I ask the indulgence of the children who may read this
book for dedicating it to a grown-up. I have a serious
reason: he is the best friend I have in the world. I have
another reason: this grown-up understands everything,
even books about children. I have a third reason: he lives
in France where he is hungry and cold. He needs cheering
up. If all these reasons are not enough, I will dedicate the
book to the child from whom this grown-up grew. All
grown-ups were once children-- although few of them
remember it. And so I correct my dedication:
To Leon Werth
when he was a little boy
4
 Chapter 1
 we are introduced to the narrator, a pilot, and his
ideas about grown-ups
Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called
True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a boa
constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing.
In the book it said: "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing
it. After that they are not able to move, and they sleep through the six months
that they need for digestion."
I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. And after some
work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing. My Drawing
Number One. It looked like this:
I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the
drawing frightened them.
But they answered: "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat?"
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa constrictor
digesting an elephant. But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it,
I made another drawing: I drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the
grown-ups could see it clearly. They always need to have things explained. My
Drawing Number Two looked like this: 
5
The grown-ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my
drawings of boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the outside, and
devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar. That is
why, at the age of six, I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as
a painter. I had been disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number One
and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by
themselves, and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining
things to them.
So then I chose another profession, and learned to pilot airplanes. I have flown
a little over all parts of the world; and it is true that geography has been very
useful to me. At a glance I can distinguish China from Arizona. If one gets lost
in the night, such knowledge is valuable.
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a great many
people who have been concerned with matters of consequence. I have lived a
great deal among grown-ups. I have seen them intimately, close at hand. And
that hasn't much improved my opinion of them.
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted, I tried the
experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always
kept. I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true understanding. But,
whoever it was, he, or she, would always say:
"That is a hat."
Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval
forests, or stars. I would bring myself down to his level. I would talk to him
about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties. And the grown-up would be
greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man.
6
Chapter 2
 the narrator crashes in the desert and makes the
acquaintance of the little prince
So I lived my life alone, without anyone that I could really talk to, until I had an
accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago. Something
was broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a mechanic nor any
passengers, I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone. It was a
question of life or death for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a
week.
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a thousand miles from any
human habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in
the middle of the ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement, at sunrise,
when I was awakened by an odd little voice. It said:
"If you please-- draw me a sheep!"
"What!"
"Draw me a sheep!"
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I
looked carefully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small person,
who stood there examining me with great seriousness. Here you may see the
best potrait that, later, I was able to make of him. But my drawing is certainly
very much less charming than its model. 
7
That, however, is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged me in my painter's
career when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything, except
boas from the outside and boas from the inside.
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out of my
head in astonishment. Remember, I had crashed in the desert a thousand
miles from any inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed neither to be
straying uncertainly among the sands, nor to be fainting from fatigue or
hunger or thirst or fear. Nothing about him gave any suggestion of a child lost
in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation.
When at last I was able to speak, I said to him:
"But-- what are you doing here?"
And in answer he repeated, very slowly, as if he were speaking of a matter of
great consequence: "If you please-- draw me a sheep..."
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. Absurd as it
might seem to me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and in
danger of death, I took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and my fountain-pen.
But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated on geography,
history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (a little crossly, too)
that I did not know how to draw. He answered me:
"That doesn't matter. Draw me a sheep..." 
8
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures I had
drawn so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was
astounded to hear the little fellow greet it with,
"No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa
constrictor is a very dangerous creature, and an elephant is very
cumbersome. Where I live, everything is very small. What I need is a sheep.
Draw me a sheep."
So then I made a drawing.
He looked at it carefully, then he said:
"No. This sheep is already very sickly. Make me another."
So I made another drawing.
My friend smiled gently and indulgenty.
"You see yourself," he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram. It has
horns."
So then I did my drawing over once more.
But it was rejected too, just like the others. 
9
"This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a long time."
By this time my patience was exhausted, because I was in a hurry to start
taking my engine apart. So I tossed off this drawing.
And I threw out an explanation with it.
"This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is inside."
I was very surprised to see a light break over the face of my young judge:
"That is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think that this sheep will have to
have a great deal of grass?"
"Why?"
"Because where I live everything is very small..."
"There will surely be enough grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep
that I have given you."
He bent his head over the drawing:
"Not so small that-- Look! He has gone to sleep..."
And that is how I made the acquaintance of the little prince.
10
 Chapter 3
the narrator learns more about from where the little
prince came
It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince, who
asked me so many questions, never seemed to hear the ones I asked him. It
was from words dropped by chance that, little by little, everything was
revealed to me.
The first time he saw my airplane, for instance (I shall not draw my airplane;
that would be much too complicated for me), he asked me:
"What is that object?"
"That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly.
He cried out, then:
"What! You dropped down from the sky?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly.
"Oh! That is funny!"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter, which irritated me
very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously.
Then he added:
"So you, too, come from the sky! Which is your planet?"
At that moment I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his
presence; and I demanded, abruptly:
"Do you come from another planet?"
But he did not reply. He tossed his head gently, without taking his eyes from
my plane:
"It is true that on that you can't have come from very far away..." 
11
And he sank into a reverie, which lasted a long time. Then, taking my sheep
out of his pocket, he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure.
You can imagine how my curiosity was aroused by this half-confidence about
the "other planets." I made a great effort, therefore, to find out more on this
subject.
"My little man, where do you come from? What is this 'where I live,' of which
you speak? Where do you want to take your sheep?"
After a reflective silence he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me is that at night he
can use it as his house."
"That is so. And if you are good I will give you a string, too, so that you can tie
him during the day, and a post to tie him to."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer:
"Tie him! What a queer idea!"
"But if you don't tie him," I said, "he will wander off somewhere, and get lost."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter:
"But where do you think he would go?"
"Anywhere. Straight ahead of him."
Then the little prince said, earnestly:
"That doesn't matter. Where I live, everything is so small!"
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness, he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far..."
12
 Chapter 4
the narrator speculates as to which asteroid from
which the little prince came
I had thus learned a second fact of great importance: this was that the planet
the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house!
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in addition to
the great planets-- such as the Earth, Jupiter, Mars, Venus-- to which we
have given names, there are also hundreds of others, some of which are so
small that one has a hard time seeing them through the telescope. When an 
13
astronomer discovers one of these he does not give it a name, but only a
number. He might call it, for example, "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason to believe that the planet from which the little prince
came is the asteroid known as B-612.
This asteroid has only once been seen through the telescope. That was by a
Turkish astronomer, in 1909.
On making his discovery, the astronomer had presented it to the International
Astronomical Congress, in a great demonstration. But he was in Turkish
costume, and so nobody would believe what he said.
Grown-ups are like that... 
14
Fortunately, however, for the reputation of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator
made a law that his subjects, under pain of death, should change to
European costume. So in 1920 the astronomer gave his demonstration all
over again, dressed with impressive style and elegance. And this time
everybody accepted his report.
If I have told you these details about the asteroid, and made a note of its
number for you, it is on account of the grown-ups and their ways. When you
tell them that you have made a new friend, they never ask you any questions
about essential matters. They never say to you, "What does his voice sound
like? What games does he love best? Does he collect butterflies?" Instead,
they demand: "How old is he? How many brothers has he? How much does
he weigh? How much money does his father make?" Only from these figures
do they think they have learned anything about him.
If you were to say to the grown-ups: "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy
brick, with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof," they would not
be able to get any idea of that house at all. You would have to say to them: "I
saw a house that cost $20,000." Then they would exclaim: "Oh, what a pretty
house that is!"
Just so, you might say to them: "The proof that the little prince existed is that
he was charming, that he laughed, and that he was looking for a sheep. If
anybody wants a sheep, that is a proof that he exists." And what good would it
do to tell them that? They would shrug their shoulders, and treat you like a
child. But if you said to them: "The planet he came from is Asteroid B-612,"
then they would be convinced, and leave you in peace from their questions.
They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should always
show great forbearance toward grown-up people.
But certainly, for us who understand life, figures are a matter of indifference. I
should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of the fairy-tales. I should 
15
have like to say: "Once upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a
planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself, and who had need of a
sheep..."
To those who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of
truth to my story.
For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered too
much grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already passed
since my friend went away from me, with his sheep. If I try to describe him
here, it is to make sure that I shall not forget him. To forget a friend is sad. Not
every one has had a friend. And if I forget him, I may become like the
grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything but figures...
It is for that purpose, again, that I have bought a box of paints and some
pencils. It is hard to take up drawing again at my age, when I have never
made any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and
the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try to make
my portraits as true to life as possible. But I am not at all sure of success. One
drawing goes along all right, and another has no resemblance to its subject. I
make some errors, too, in the little prince's height: in one place he is too tall
and in another too short. And I feel some doubts about the color of his
costume. So I fumble along as best I can, now good, now bad, and I hope
generally fair-to-middling.
In certain more important details I shall make mistakes, also. But that is
something that will not be my fault. My friend never explained anything to me.
He thought, perhaps, that I was like himself. But I, alas, do not know how to
see sheep through t he walls of boxes. Perhaps I am a little like the
grown-ups. I have had to grow old.
16
 Chapter 5
we are warned as to the dangers of the baobabs
As each day passed I would learn, in our talk, something about the little
prince's planet, his departure from it, his journey. The information would come
very slowly, as it might chance to fall from his thoughts. It was in this way that
I heard, on the third day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs.
This time, once more, I had the sheep to thank for it. For the little prince asked
me abruptly-- as if seized by a grave doubt-- "It is true, isn't it, that sheep eat
little bushes?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad!"
I did not understand why it was so important that sheep should eat little
bushes. But the little prince added:
"Then it follows that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out to the little prince that baobabs were not little bushes, but, on the
contrary, trees as big as castles; and that even if he took a whole herd of
elephants away with him, the herd would not eat up one single baobab.
The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh.
"We would have to put them one on top of the other," he said.
But he made a wise comment: 
17
"Before they grow so big, the baobabs start out by being little."
"That is strictly correct," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little
baobabs?"
He answered me at once, "Oh, come, come!", as if he were speaking of
something that was self-evident. And I was obliged to make a great mental
effort to solve this problem, without any assistance.
Indeed, as I learned, there were on the planet where the little prince lived-- as
on all planets-- good plants and bad plants. In consequence, there were good
seeds from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are
invisible. They sleep deep in the heart of the earth's darkness, until some one
among them is seized with the desire to awaken. Then this little seed will
stretch itself and begin-- timidly at first-- to push a charming little sprig
inoffensively upward toward the sun. If it is only a sprout of radish or the sprig
of a rose-bush, one would let it grow wherever it might wish. But when it is a
bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible, the very first instant that
one recognizes it.
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet that was the home of the
little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil of that planet
was infested with them. A baobab is something you will never, never be able
to get rid of if you attend to it too late. It spreads over the entire planet. It
bores clear through it with its roots. And if the planet is too small, and the
baobabs are too many, they split it in pieces... 
18
"It is a question of discipline," the little prince said to me later on. "When
you've finished your own toilet in the morning, then it is time to attend to the
toilet of your planet, just so, with the greatest care. You must see to it that you
pull up regularly all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be
distinguished from the rosebushes which they resemble so closely in their
earliest youth. It is very tedious work," the little prince added, "but very easy."
And one day he said to me: "You ought to make a beautiful drawing, so that
the children where you live can see exactly how all this is. That would be very
useful to them if they were to travel some day. Sometimes," he added, "there
is no harm in putting off a piece of work until another day. But when it is a
matter of baobabs, that always means a catastrophe. I knew a planet that
was inhabited by a lazy man. He neglected three little bushes..."
So, as the little prince described it to me, I have made a drawing of that planet.
I do not much like to take the tone of a moralist. But the danger of the
baobabs is so little understood, and such considerable risks would be run by 
19
anyone who might get lost on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through
my reserve. "Children," I say plainly, "watch out for the baobabs!"
My friends, like myself, have been skirting this danger for a long time, without
ever knowing it; and so it is for them that I have worked so hard over this
drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means is worth all the trouble it
has cost me.
Perhaps you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book as
magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs?"
The reply is simple. I have tried. But with the others I have not been
successful. When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond
myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity.
20
 Chapter 6
the little prince and the narrator talk about sunsets
Oh, little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the secrets of your sad little
life... For a long time you had found your only entertainment in the quiet
pleasure of looking at the sunset. I learned that new detail on the morning of
the fourth day, w hen you said to me:
"I am very fond of sunsets. Come, let us go look at a sunset now."
"But we must wait," I said.
"Wait? For what?"
"For the sunset. We must wait until it is time."
At first you seemed to be very much surprised. And then you laughed to
yourself. You said to me:
"I am always thinking that I am at home!"
Just so. Everybody knows that when it is noon in the United States the sun is
setting over France.
If you could fly to France in one minute, you could go straight into the sunset,
right from noon. Unfortunately, France is too far away for that. But on your tiny
planet, my little prince, all you need do is move your chair a few steps. You
can see the day end and the twilight falling whenever you like...
"One day," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times!" 
21
And a little later you added:
"You know-- one loves the sunset, when one is so sad..."
"Were you so sad, then?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets?"
But the little prince made no reply.
22
 Chapter 7
the narrator learns about the secret of the little
prince's life
On the fifth day-- again, as always, it was thanks to the sheep-- the secret of
the little prince's life was revealed to me. Abruptly, without anything to lead up
to it, and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his
problem, he demanded:
"A sheep-- if it eats little bushes, does it eat flowers, too?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach."
"Even flowers that have thorns?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns-- what use are they?"
I did not know. At that moment I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt that
had got stuck in my engine. I was very much worried, for it was becoming
clear to me that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious. And I had
so little drinking-water left that I had to fear for the worst.
"The thorns-- what use are they?"
The little prince never let go of a question, once he had asked it. As for me, I
was upset over that bolt. And I answered with the first thing that came into my
head:
"The thorns are of no use at all. Flowers have thorns just for spite!"
"Oh!"
There was a moment of complete silence. Then the little prince flashed back
at me, with a kind of resentfulness:
"I don't believe you! Flowers are weak creatures. They are na 飗 e. They
reassure themselves as best they can. They believe that their thorns are
terrible weapons..." 
23
I did not answer. At that instant I was saying to myself: "If this bolt still won't
turn, I am going to knock it out with the hammer." Again the little prince
disturbed my thoughts.
"And you actually believe that the flowers--"
"Oh, no!" I cried. "No, no no! I don't believe anything. I answered you with the
first thing that came into my head. Don't you see-- I am very busy with matters
of consequence!"
He stared at me, thunderstruck.
"Matters of consequence!"
He looked at me there, with my hammer in my hand, my fingers black with
engine-grease, bending down over an object which seemed to him extremely
ugly...
"You talk just like the grown-ups!"
That made me a little ashamed. But he went on, relentlessly:
"You mix everything up together... You confuse everything..."
He was really very angry. He tossed his golden curls in the breeze.
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced gentleman. He has never
smelled a flower. He has never looked at a star. He has never loved any one.
He has never done anything in his life but add up figures. And all day he says
over and over, just like you: 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that
makes him swell up with pride. But he is not a man-- he is a mushroom!"
"A what?"
"A mushroom!"
The little prince was now white with rage.
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years. For millions of
years the sheep have been eating them just the same. And is it not a matter
of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to
grow thorns which are never of any use to them? Is the warfare between the
sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence than a
fat red-faced gentleman's sums? And if I know-- I, myself-- one flower which
is unique in the world, which grows nowhere but on my planet, but which one 
24
little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning, without even noticing
what he is doing-- Oh! You think that is not important!"
His face turned from white to red as he continued:
"If some one loves a flower, of which just one single blossom grows in all the
millions and millions of stars, it is enough to make him happy just to look at
the stars. He can say to himself, 'Somewhere, my flower is there...' But if the
sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened... And you
think that is not important!"
He could not say anything more. His words were choked by sobbing.
The night had fallen. I had let my tools drop from my hands. Of what moment
now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death? On one star, one planet, my
planet, the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted. I took him in my
arms, and rocked him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger. I will draw you a muzzle for your
sheep. I will draw you a railing to put around your flower. I will--"
I did not know what to say to him. I felt awkward and blundering. I did not
know how I could reach him, where I could overtake him and go on hand in
hand with him once more.
It is such a secret place, the land of tears.
25
 Chapter 8
the rose arrives at the little prince's planet
I soon learned to know this flower better. On the little prince's planet the
flowers had always been very simple. They had only one ring of petals; they
took up no room at all; they were a trouble to nobody. One morning they
would appear in the grass, and by night they would have faded peacefully
away. But one day, from a seed blown from no one knew where, a new flower
had come up; and the little prince had watched very closely over this small
sprout which was not like any other small sprouts on his planet. It might, you
see, have been a new kind of baobab.
The shrub soon stopped growing, and began to get ready to produce a flower.
The little prince, who was present at the first appearance of a huge bud, felt at
once that some sort of miraculous apparition must emerge from it. But the
flower was not satisfied to complete the preparations for her beauty in the
shelter of her green chamber. She chose her colours with the greatest care.
She adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to go out into the world
all rumpled, like the field poppies. It was only in the full radiance of her beauty
that she wished to appear. Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature! And her
mysterious adornment lasted for days and days.
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise, she suddenly showed herself.
And, after working with all this painstaking precision, she yawned and said: 
26
"Ah! I am scarcely awake. I beg that you will excuse me. My petals are still all
disarranged..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration:
"Oh! How beautiful you are!"
"Am I not?" the flower responded, sweetly. "And I was born at the same
moment as the sun..."
The little prince could guess easily enough that she was not any too modest--
but how moving-- and exciting-- she was!
"I think it is time for breakfast," she added an instant later. "If you would have
the kindness to think of my needs--"
And the little prince, completely abashed, went to look for a sprinkling-can of
fresh water. So, he tended the flower.
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity-- which was, if
the truth be known, a little difficult to deal with. One day, for instance, when
she was speaking of her four thorns, she said to the little prince:
"Let the tigers come with their claws!"
"There are no tigers on my planet," the little prince objected. "And, anyway,
tigers do not eat weeds." 
27
"I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly.
"Please excuse me..."
"I am not at all afraid of tigers," she went on, "but I have a horror of drafts. I
suppose you wouldn't have a screen for me?"
"A horror of drafts-- that is bad luck, for a plant," remarked the little prince,
and added to himself, "This flower is a very complex creature..."
"At night I want you to put me under a glass globe. It is very cold where you
live. In the place I came from--"
But she interrupted herself at that point. She had come in the form of a seed.
She could not have known anything of any other worlds. Embarassed over
having let herself be caught on the verge of such a na 飗 e untruth, she
coughed two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong.
"The screen?"
"I was just going to look for it when you spoke to me..." 
28
Then she forced her cough a little more so that he should suffer from remorse
just the same.
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his
love, had soon come to doubt her. He had taken seriously words which were
without importance, and it made him very unhappy.
"I ought not to have listened to her," he confided to me one day. "One never
ought to listen to the flowers. One should simply look at them and breathe
their fragrance. Mine perfumed all my planet. But I did not know how to take
pleasure in all her grace. This tale of claws, which disturbed me so much,
should only have filled my heart with tenderness and pity."
And he continued his confidences:
"The fact is that I did not know how to understand anything! I ought to have
judged by deeds and not by words. She cast her fragrance and her radiance
over me. I ought never to have run away from her... I ought to have guessed
all the affection that lay behind her poor little strategems. Flowers are so
inconsistent! But I was too young to know how to love her..."
29
 Chapter 9
the little prince leaves his planet
I believe that for his escape he took advantage of the migration of a flock of
wild birds. On the morning of his departure he put his planet in perfect order.
He carefully cleaned out his active volcanoes. He possessed two active
volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the
morning. He also had one volcano that was extinct. But, as he said, "One
never knows!" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well
cleaned out, volcanoes burn slowly and steadily, without any eruptions.
Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney.
On our earth we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes.
That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us.
The little prince also pulled up, with a certain sense of dejection, the last little
shoots of the baobabs. He believed that he would never want to return. But
on this last morning all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him. And
when he watered the flower for the last time, and prepared to place her under
the shelter of her glass globe, he realised that he was very close to tears.
"Goodbye," he said to the flower.
But she made no answer.
"Goodbye," he said again.
The flower coughed. But it was not because she had a cold. 
30
"I have been silly," she said to him, at last. "I ask your forgiveness. Try to be
happy..."
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches. He stood there all
bewildered, the glass globe held arrested in mid-air. He did not understand
this quiet sweetness.
"Of course I love you," the flower said to him. "It is my fault that you have not
known it all the while. That is of no importance. But you-- you have been just
as foolish as I. Try to be happy... let the glass globe be. I don't want it any
more."
"But the wind--"
"My cold is not so bad as all that... the cool night air will do me good. I am a
flower."
"But the animals--"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars if I wish to
become acquainted with the butterflies. It seems that they are very beautiful.
And if not the butterflies-- and the caterpillars-- who will call upon me? You
will be far away... as for the large animals-- I am not at all afraid of any of
them. I have my claws."
And, na 飗 ely, she showed her four thorns. Then she added:
"Don't linger like this. You have decided to go away. Now go!"
For she did not want him to see her crying. She was such a proud flower...
31
 Chapter 10
the little prince visits the king
He found himself in the neighborhood of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328,
329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them, in order to add to his
knowledge.
The first of them was inhabited by a king. Clad in royal purple and ermine, he
was seated upon a throne which was at the same time both simple and
majestic.
"Ah! Here is a subject," exclaimed the king, when he saw the little prince
coming.
And the little prince asked himself:
"How could he recognize me when he had never seen me before?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings. To them, all men are
subjects.
"Approach, so that I may see you better," said the king, who felt consumingly
proud of being at last a king over somebody.
The little prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down; but the entire
planet was crammed and obstructed by the king's magnificent ermine robe.
So he remained standing upright, and, since he was tired, he yawned.
"It is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king," the monarch said
to him. "I forbid you to do so."
"I can't help it. I can't stop myself," replied the little prince, thoroughly
embarrassed. "I have come on a long journey, and I have had no sleep..."
"Ah, then," the king said. "I order you to yawn. It is years since I have seen
anyone yawning. Yawns, to me, are objects of curiosity. Come, now! Yawn
again! It is an order."
"That frightens me... I cannot, any more..." murmured the little prince, now
completely abashed.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I-- I order you sometimes to yawn and
sometimes to--" 
32
He sputtered a little, and seemed vexed.
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon was that his authority should
be respected. He tolerated no disobedience. He was an absolute monarch.
But, because he was a very good man, he made his orders reasonable.
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example, "if I ordered a
general to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not obey me,
that would not be the fault of the general. It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince.
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a
fold of his ermine mantle.
But the little prince was wondering... The planet was tiny. Over what could
this king really rule?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg that you will excuse my asking you a question--"
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him.
"Sire-- over what do you rule?"
"Over everything," said the king, with magnificent simplicity. 
33
"Over everything?"
The king made a gesture, which took in his planet, the other planets, and all
the stars.
"Over all that?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered.
For his rule was not only absolute: it was also universal.
"And the stars obey you?"
"Certainly they do," the king said. "They obey instantly. I do not permit
insubordination."
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at. If he had been master
of such complete authority, he would have been able to watch the sunset, not
forty-four times in one day, but seventy-two, or even a hundred, or even two
hundred times, with out ever having to move his chair. And because he felt a
bit sad as he remembered his little planet which he had forsaken, he plucked
up his courage to ask the king a favor:
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness... Order the sun to set..."
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly, or to
write a tragic drama, or to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general
did not carry out the order that he had received, which one of us would be in
the wrong?" the king demanded. "The general, or myself?"
"You," said the little prince firmly.
"Exactly. One much require from each one the duty which each one can
perform," the king went on. "Accepted authority rests first of all on reason. If
you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea, they would
rise up in revolution. I have the right to require obedience because my orders
are reasonable."
"Then my sunset?" the little prince reminded him: for he never forgot a
question once he had asked it.
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it. But, according to my science
of government, I shall wait until conditions are favorable."
"When will that be?" inquired the little prince. 
34
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else he consulted a
bulky almanac. "Hum! Hum! That will be about-- about-- that will be this
evening about twenty minutes to eight. And you will see how well I am
obeyed."
The little prince yawned. He was regretting his lost sunset. And then, too, he
was already beginning to be a little bored.
"I have nothing more to do here," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my
way again."
"Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go.
I will make you a Minister!"
"Minister of what?"
"Minster of-- of Justice!"
"But there is nobody here to judge!"
"We do not know that," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete
tour of my kingdom. I am very old. There is no room here for a carriage. And it
tires me to walk."
"Oh, but I have looked already!" said the little prince, turning around to give
one more glance to the other side of the planet. On that side, as on this, there
was nobody at all...
"Then you shall judge yourself," the king answered. "that is the most difficult
thing of all. It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others. If
you succeed in judging yourself rightly, then you are indeed a man of true
wisdom."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere. I do not need to
live on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe that somewhere on
my planet there is an old rat. I hear him at night. You can judge this old rat.
From time to time you will condemn him to death. Thus his life will depend on
your justice. But you will pardon him on each occasion; for he must be treated
thriftily. He is the only one we have."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death. And now
I think I will go on my way."
"No," said the king. 
35
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure, had
no wish to grieve the old monarch.
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed," he said, "he should be able
to give me a reasonable order. He should be able, for example, to order me to
be gone by the end of one minute. It seems to me that conditions are
favorable..."
As the king made no answer, the little prince hesitated a moment. Then, with
a sigh, he took his leave.
"I made you my Ambassador," the king called out, hastily.
He had a magnificent air of authority.
"The grown-ups are very strange," the little prince said to himself, as he
continued on his journey.
36
 Chapter 11
the little prince visits the conceited man
The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man.
"Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!" he exclaimed from afar,
when he first saw the little prince coming.
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers.
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing."
"It is a hat for salutes," the conceited man replied. "It is to raise in salute when
people acclaim me. Unfortunately, nobody at all ever passes this way."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man
was talking about. 
37
"Clap your hands, one against the other," the conceited man now directed
him.
The little prince clapped his hands. The conceited man raised his hat in a
modest salute.
"This is more entertaining than the visit to the king," the little prince said to
himself. And he began again to clap his hands, one against the other. The
conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise the little prince grew tired of the game's
monotony.
"And what should one do to make the hat come down?" he asked.
But the conceited man did not hear him. Conceited people never hear
anything but praise.
"Do you really admire me very much?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean-- 'admire'?"
"To admire mean that you regard me as the handsomest, the best-dressed,
the richest, and the most intelligent man on this planet."
"But you are the only man on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness. Admire me just the same."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly, "but
what is there in that to interest you so much?"
And the little prince went away.
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd," he said to himself, as he continued
on his journey.
38
 Chapter 12
the little prince visits the tippler
The next planet was inhabited by a tippler. This was a very short visit, but it
plunged the little prince into deep dejection.
"What are you doing there?" he said to the tippler, whom he found settled
down in silence before a collection of empty bottles and also a collection of
full bottles.
"I am drinking," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air.
"Why are you drinking?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired the little prince, who already was sorry for him.
"Forget that I am ashamed," the tippler confessed, hanging his head.
"Ashamed of what?" insisted the little prince, who wanted to help him.
"Ashamed of drinking!" The tippler brought his speech to an end, and shut
himself up in an impregnable silence. 
39
And the little prince went away, puzzled.
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he
continued on his journey.
40
 Chapter 13
the little prince visits the businessman
The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. This man was so much
occupied that he did not even raise his head at the little prince's arrival.
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out."
"Three and two make five. Five and seven make twelve. Twelve and three
make fifteen. Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two. Twenty-two
and six make twenty-eight. I haven't time to light it again. Twenty-six and five
make thirty-one. Phew! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million,
six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one."
"Five hundred million what?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there? Five-hundred-and-one million-- I can't stop... I have
so much to do! I am concerned with matters of consequence. I don't amuse
myself with balderdash. Two and five make seven..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in
his life had let go of a question once he had asked it.
The businessman raised his head. 
41
"During the fifty-four years that I have inhabited this planet, I have been
disturbed only three times. The first time was twenty-two years ago, when
some giddy goose fell from goodness knows where. He made the most
frightful noise that resounded all over the place, and I made four mistakes in
my addition. The second time, eleven years ago, I was disturbed by an attack
of rheumatism. I don't get enough exercise. I have no time for loafing. The
third time-- well, this is it! I was saying, then, five -hundred-and-one millions--"
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in
peace until he answered this question.
"Millions of those little objects," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the
sky."
"Flies?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects."
"Bees?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects that set lazy men to idle dreaming. As for me, I
am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle
dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand,
seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am
accurate."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them."
"You own the stars?" 
42
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who--"
"Kings do not own, they reign over. It is a very different matter."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars?"
"It does me the good of making me rich."
"And what good does it do you to be rich?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars, if any are ever discovered."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor
tippler..."
Nevertheless, he still had some more questions.
"How is it possible for one to own the stars?"
"To whom do they belong?" the businessman retorted, peevishly.
"I don't know. To nobody."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it."
"Is that all that is necessary?"
"Certainly. When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours.
When you discover an island that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you
get an idea before any one else, you take out a patent on it: it is yours. So
with me: I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of
owning them."
"Yes, that is true," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them?"
"I administer them," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them.
It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of
consequence."
The little prince was still not satisfied.
"If I owned a silk scarf," he said, "I could put it around my neck and take it
away with me. If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away
with me. But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven..." 
43
"No. But I can put them in the bank."
"Whatever does that mean?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper. And then I
put this paper in a drawer and lock it with a key."
"And that is all?"
"That is enough," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic. But it is of no
great consequence."
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very
different from those of the grown-ups.
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation with the businessman,
"which I water every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week
(for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows). It is of some use
to my volcanoes, and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them. But you
are of no use to the stars..."
The businessman opened his mouth, but he found nothing to say in answer.
And the little prince went away.
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary," he said simply, talking
to himself as he continued on his journey.
44
 Chapter 14
the little prince visits the lamplighter
The fifth planet was very strange. It was the smallest of all. There was just
enough room on it for a street lamp and a lamplighter. The little prince was
not able to reach any explanation of the use of a street lamp and a lamplighter,
somewhere in the heavens, on a planet which had no people, and not one
house. But he said to himself, nevertheless:
"It may well be that this man is absurd. But he is not so absurd as the king,
the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler. For at least his work
has some meaning. When he lights his street lamp, it is as if he brought one
more star to life, or one flower. When he puts out his lamp, he sends the
flower, or the star, to sleep. That is a beautiful occupation. And since it is
beautiful, it is truly useful."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted his lamp again. 
45
"But why have you just lighted it again?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter.
"I do not understand," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders.
Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead with a handkerchief decorated with red
squares.
"I follow a terrible profession. In the old days it was reasonable. I put the lamp
out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the
day for relaxation and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the
tragedy! From year to year the planet has turned more rapidly and the orders
have not been changed!"
"Then what?" asked the little prince.
"Then-- the planet now makes a complete turn every minute, and I no longer
have a single second for repose. Once every minute I have to light my lamp
and put it out!"
"That is very funny! A day lasts only one minute, here where you live!"
"It is not funny at all!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking
together a month has gone by."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes. Thirty days. Good evening."
And he lighted his lamp again.
As the little prince watched him, he felt that he loved this lamplighter who was
so faithful to his orders. He remembered the sunsets which he himself had
gone to seek, in other days, merely by pulling up his chair; and he wanted to
help his friend. 
46
"You know," he said, "I can tell you a way you can rest whenever you want
to..."
"I always want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible for a man to be faithful and lazy at the same time.
The little prince went on with his explanation:
"Your planet is so small that three strides will take you all the way around it.
To be always in the sunshine, you need only walk along rather slowly. When
you want to rest, you will walk-- and the day will last as long as you like."
"That doesn't do me much good," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in
life is to sleep."
"Then you're unlucky," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his
journey, "that man would be scorned by all the others: by the king, by the
conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless he is the
only one of them all who does not seem to me ridiculous. Perhaps that is
because he is thinking of something else besides himself."
He breathed a sigh of regret, and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend. But
his planet is indeed too small. There is no room on it for two people..."
What the little prince did not dare confess was that he was sorry most of all to
leave this planet, because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets!
47
 Chapter 15
the little prince visits the geographer
The sixth planet was ten times larger than the last one. It was inhabited by an
old gentleman who wrote voluminous books.
"Oh, look! Here is an explorer!" he exclaimed to himself when he saw the little
prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table and panted a little. He had already
traveled so much and so far!
"Where do you come from?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book?" said the little prince. "What are you doing?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar who knows the location of all the seas, rivers,
towns, mountains, and deserts."
"That is very interesting," said the little prince. "Here at last is a man who has
a real profession!" And he cast a look around him at the planet of the
geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet that he had ever
seen. 
48
"Your planet is very beautiful," he said. "Has it any oceans?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed. "Has it any mountains?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either."
"But you are a geographer!"
"Exactly," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer. I haven't a single
explorer on my planet. It is not the geographer who goes out to count the
towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The
geographer is much too important to go loafing about. He does not leave his
desk. But he receives the explorers in his study. He asks them questions, and
he notes down what they recall of their travels. And if the recollections of any
one among them seem interesting to him, the geographer orders an inquiry
into that explorer's moral character."
"Why is that?"
"Because an explorer who told lies would bring disaster on the books of the
geographer. So would an explorer who drank too much."
"Why is that?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double. Then the geographer would note down
two mountains in a place where there was only one."
"I know some one," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to
be good, an inquiry is ordered into his discovery."
"One goes to see it?"
"No. That would be too complicated. But one requires the explorer to furnish
proofs. For example, if the discovery in question is that of a large mountain,
one requires that large stones be brought back from it."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement. 
49
"But you-- you come from far away! You are an explorer! You shall describe
your planet to me!"
And, having opened his big register, the geographer sharpened his pencil.
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil. One waits until the
explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink.
"Well?" said the geographer expectantly.
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting. It is all so
small. I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is
extinct. But one never knows."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are
ephemeral."
"What does that mean-- 'ephemeral'?"
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are
most concerned with matters of consequence. They never become
old-fashioned. It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position. It is very
rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters. We write of eternal things."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again," the little prince interrupted.
"What does that mean-- 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive, it comes to the same thing for us,"
said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain. It does not
change."
"But what does that mean-- 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who
never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it.
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance.'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is." 
50
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only
four thorns to defend herself against the world. And I have left her on my
planet, all alone!"
That was his first moment of regret. But he took courage once more.
"What place would you advise me to visit now?" he asked.
"The planet Earth," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower.
51
 Chapter 16
the narrator discusses the Earth's lamplighters
So then the seventh planet was the Earth.
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet! One can count, there 111 kings (not
forgetting, to be sure, the Negro kings among them), 7000 geographers,
900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men-- that
is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups.
To give you an idea of the size of the Earth, I will tell you that before the
invention of electricity it was necessary to maintain, over the whole of the six
continents, a veritable army of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps.
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle. The
movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the
opera. First would come the turn of the lamplighters of New Zealand and
Australia. Having set their lamps alight, these would go off to sleep. Next, the
lamplighters of China and Siberia would enter for their steps in the dance, and
then they too would be waved back into the wings. After that would come the
turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and
Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then
those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of
their entry upon the stage. It would be magnificent.
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole, and his
colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole-- only
these two would live free from toil and care: they would be busy twice a year.
52
Chapter 17
the little prince makes the acquaintance of the snake
When one wishes to play the wit, he sometimes wanders a little from the truth.
I have not been altogether honest in what I have told you about the
lamplighters. And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet
to those who do not k now it. Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth. If
the two billion inhabitants who people its surface were all to stand upright and
somewhat crowded together, as they do for some big public assembly, they
could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles
wide. All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet.
The grown-ups, to be sure, will not believe you when you tell them that. They
imagine that they fill a great deal of space. They fancy themselves as
important as the baobabs. You should advise them, then, to make their own
calculations. They adore fig ures, and that will please them. But do not waste
your time on this extra task. It is unnecessary. You have, I know, confidence
in me.
When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to
see any people. He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong
planet, when a coil of gold, the color of the moonlight, flashed across the
sand. 
53
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously.
"Good evening," said the snake.
"What planet is this on which I have come down?" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth?"
"This is the desert. There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large," said
the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his eyes toward the sky.
"I wonder," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one
day each one of us may find his own again... Look at my planet. It is right
there above us. But how far away it is!" 
54
"It is beautiful," the snake said. "What has brought you here?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake.
And they were both silent.
"Where are the men?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again.
"It is a little lonely in the desert..."
"It is also lonely among men," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time.
"You are a funny animal," he said at last. "You are no thicker than a finger..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king," said the snake.
The little prince smiled.
"You are not very powerful. You haven't even any feet. You cannot even
travel..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle, like a golden bracelet.
"Whomever I touch, I send back to the earth from whence he came," the
snake spoke again. "But you are innocent and true, and you come from a
star..."
The little prince made no reply.
"You move me to pity-- you are so weak on this Earth made of granite," the
snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own
planet. I can--"
"Oh! I understand you very well," said the little prince. "But why do you always
speak in riddles?"
"I solve them all," said the snake.
And they were both silent.
55
Chapter 18
the little prince goes looking for men and meets a
flower
The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower. It was a
flower with three petals, a flower of no account at all.
"Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men?" the little prince asked, politely.
The flower had once seen a caravan passing.
"Men?" she echoed. "I think there are six or seven of them in existence. I saw
them, several years ago. But one never knows where to find them. The wind
blows them away. They have no roots, and that makes their life very difficult."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower.
56
 Chapter 19
the little prince climbs a mountain range
After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain. The only mountains he
had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees. And
he used the extinct volcano as a footstool. "From a mountain as high as this
one," he said to himself, "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance,
and all the people..."
But he saw nothing, save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles.
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning--Good morning," answered the echo. 
57
"Who are you?" said the little prince.
"Who are you--Who are you--Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone," he said.
"I am all alone--all alone--all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet!" he thought. "It is altogether dry, and altogether pointed,
and altogether harsh and forbidding. And the people have no imagination.
They repeat whatever one says to them... On my planet I had a flower; she
always was the first to speak..."
58
 Chapter 20
the little prince discovers a garden of roses
But it happened that after walking for a long time through sand, and rocks,
and snow, the little prince at last came upon a road. And all roads lead to the
abodes of men.
"Good morning," he said.
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses.
"Good morning," said the roses.
The little prince gazed at them. They all looked like his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck.
"We are roses," the roses said.
And he was overcome with sadness. His flower had told him that she was the
only one of her kind in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them,
all alike, in one single garden!
"She would be very much annoyed," he said to himself, "if she should see
that... she would cough most dreadfully, and she would pretend that she was
dying, to avoid being laughed at. And I should be obliged to pretend that I was 
59
nursing her back to life-- for if I did not do that, to humble myself also, she
would really allow herself to die..."
Then he went on with his reflections: "I thought that I was rich, with a flower
that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose. A common
rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees-- and one of them
perhaps extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince..."
And he lay down in the grass and cried.
60
 Chapter 21
the little prince befriends the fox
It was then that the fox appeared.
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned
around he saw nothing.
"I am right here," the voice said, "under the apple tree."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added, "You are very pretty to look
at."
"I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed."
"Ah! Please excuse me," said the little prince.
But, after some thought, he added:
"What does that mean-- 'tame'?"
"You do not live here," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean-- 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns, and they hunt. It is very disturbing.
They also raise chickens. These are their only interests. Are you looking for
chickens?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends. What does that mean--
'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected," said the fox. It means to establish ties."
"'To establish ties'?" 
61
"Just that," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more than a little boy
who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys. And I have no need of
you. And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more
than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we
shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I
shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I
think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince.
The fox seemed perplexed, and very curious.
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect," sighed the fox.
But he came back to his idea. 
62
"My life is very monotonous," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All
the chickens are just alike, and all the men are just alike. And, in
consequence, I am a little bored. But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun
came to shine on my life . I shall know the sound of a step that will be different
from all the others. Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the
ground. Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow. And then look: you
see the grain-fields down yonder? I do not ea t bread. Wheat is of no use to
me. The wheat fields have nothing to say to me. And that is sad. But you have
hair that is the colour of gold. Think how wonderful that will be when you have
tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me bac k the thought of
you. And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat..."
The fox gazed at the little prince, for a long time.
"Please-- tame me!" he said.
"I want to, very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time. I
have friends to discover, and a great many things to understand."
"One only understands the things that one tames," said the fox. "Men have no
more time to understand anything. They buy things all ready made at the
shops. But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship, and so
men have no friends any more. If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little
distance from me-- like that-- in the grass. I shall look at you out of the corner
of my eye, and you will say nothing. Words are the source of
misunderstandings. But you will sit a little closer to me, every day..." 
63
The next day the little prince came back.
"It would have been better to come back at the same hour," said the fox. "If,
for example, you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I
shall begin to be happy. I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances.
At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying and jumping about. I shall show
you how happy I am! But if you come at just any time, I shall never know at
what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you... One must observe the proper
rites..."
"What is a rite?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected," said the fox. "They are what
make one day different from other days, one hour from other hours. There is a
rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the
village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far
as the vineyards. But if the hunters danced at just any time, every day would
be like every other day, and I should never have any vacation at all."
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew
near--
"Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry." 
64
"It is your own fault," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of
harm; but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the color of the wheat fields."
And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses. You will understand now that yours is unique
in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a
present of a secret."
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses.
"You are not at all like my rose," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has
tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew
him. He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made
him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world."
And the roses were very much embarrassed.
"You are beautiful, but you are empty," he went on. "One could not die for you.
To be sure, an ordinary passerby would think that my rose looked just like
you-- the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone she is more important
than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered;
because it is she that I have put under the glass globe; because it is she that I
have sheltered behind the screen; because it is for her that I have killed the
caterpillars (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies);
because it is she that I have listened to, when she grumbled, or boasted, or
even sometimes when she said nothing. Because she is my rose.
And he went back to meet the fox.
"Goodbye," he said.
"Goodbye," said the fox. "And now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It
is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to
the eye." 
65
"What is essential is invisible to the eye," the little prince repeated, so that he
would be sure to remember.
"It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so
important."
"It is the time I have wasted for my rose--" said the little prince, so that he
would be sure to remember.
"Men have forgotten this truth," said the fox. "But you must not forget it. You
become responsible, forever, for what you have tamed. You are responsible
for your rose..."
"I am responsible for my rose," the little prince repeated, so that he would be
sure to remember.
66
 Chapter 22
the little prince encounters a railway switchman
"Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the railway switchman.
"What do you do here?" the little prince asked.
"I sort out travelers, in bundles of a thousand," said the switchman. "I send off
the trains that carry them; now to the right, now to the left."
And a brilliantly lighted express train shook the switchman's cabin as it rushed
by with a roar like thunder.
"They are in a great hurry," said the little prince. "What are they looking for?"
"Not even the locomotive engineer knows that," said the switchman.
And a second brilliantly lighted express thundered by, in the opposite
direction.
"Are they coming back already?" demanded the little prince.
"These are not the same ones," said the switchman. "It is an exchange."
"Were they not satisfied where they were?" asked the little prince.
"No one is ever satisfied where he is," said the switchman.
And they heard the roaring thunder of a third brilliantly lighted express.
"Are they pursuing the first travelers?" demanded the little prince.
"They are pursuing nothing at all," said the switchman. "They are asleep in
there, or if they are not asleep they are yawning. Only the children are
flattening their noses against the windowpanes."
"Only the children know what they are looking for," said the little prince. "They
waste their time over a rag doll and it becomes very important to them; and if
anybody takes it away from them, they cry..." 
67
"They are lucky," the switchman said.
68
 Chapter 23
the little prince encounters a merchant
"Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the merchant.
This was a merchant who sold pills that had been invented to quench thirst.
You need only swallow one pill a week, and you would feel no need of
anything to drink.
"Why are you selling those?" asked the little prince.
"Because they save a tremendous amount of time," said the merchant.
"Computations have been made by experts. With these pills, you save
fifty-three minutes in every week."
"And what do I do with those fifty-three minutes?"
"Anything you like..."
"As for me," said the little prince to himself, "if I had fifty-three minutes to
spend as I liked, I should walk at my leisure toward a spring of fresh water."
69
 Chapter 24
the narrator and the little prince, thirsty, hunt for a
well in the desert
It was now the eighth day since I had had my accident in the desert, and I had
listened to the story of the merchant as I was drinking the last drop of my
water supply.
"Ah," I said to the little prince, "these memories of yours are very charming;
but I have not yet succeeded in repairing my plane; I have nothing more to
drink; and I, too, should be very happy if I could walk at my leisure toward a
spring of fresh water!"
"My friend the fox--" the little prince said to me.
"My dear little man, this is no longer a matter that has anything to do with the
fox!"
"Why not?"
"Because I am about to die of thirst..."
He did not follow my reasoning, and he answered me:
"It is a good thing to have had a friend, even if one is about to die. I, for
instance, am very glad to have had a fox as a friend..."
"He has no way of guessing the danger," I said to myself. "He has never been
either hungry or thirsty. A little sunshine is all he needs..."
But he looked at me steadily, and replied to my thought:
"I am thirsty, too. Let us look for a well..."
I made a gesture of weariness. It is absurd to look for a well, at random, in the
immensity of the desert. But nevertheless we started walking.
When we had trudged along for several hours, in silence, the darkness fell,
and the stars began to come out. Thirst had made me a little feverish, and I
looked at them as if I were in a dream. The little prince's last words came
reeling back into my memory: 
70
"Then you are thirsty, too?" I demanded.
But he did not reply to my question. He merely said to me:
"Water may also be good for the heart..."
I did not understand this answer, but I said nothing. I knew very well that it
was impossible to cross-examine him.
He was tired. He sat down. I sat down beside him. And, after a little silence,
he spoke again:
"The stars are beautiful, because of a flower that cannot be seen."
I replied, "Yes, that is so." And, without saying anything more, I looked across
the ridges of sand that were stretched out before us in the moonlight.
"The desert is beautiful," the little prince added.
And that was true. I have always loved the desert. One sits down on a desert
sand dune, sees nothing, hears nothing. Yet through the silence something
throbs, and gleams...
"What makes the desert beautiful," said the little prince, "is that somewhere it
hides a well..."
I was astonished by a sudden understanding of that mysterious radiation of
the sands. When I was a little boy I lived in an old house, and legend told us
that a treasure was buried there. To be sure, no one had ever known how to
find it; perhaps no one had ever even looked for it. But it cast an enchantment
over that house. My home was hiding a secret in the depths of its heart...
"Yes," I said to the little prince. "The house, the stars, the desert-- what gives
them their beauty is something that is invisible!"
"I am glad," he said, "that you agree with my fox."
As the little prince dropped off to sleep, I took him in my arms and set out
walking once more. I felt deeply moved, and stirred. It seemed to me that I
was carrying a very fragile treasure. It seemed to me, even, that there was
nothing more fragile on all Earth. In the moonlight I looked at his pale
forehead, his closed eyes, his locks of hair that trembled in the wind, and I
said to myself: "What I see here is nothing but a shell. What is most important
is invisible..." 
71
As his lips opened slightly with the suspicious of a half-smile, I said to myself,
again: "What moves me so deeply, about this little prince who is sleeping here,
is his loyalty to a flower-- the image of a rose that shines through his whole
being like the flame of a lamp, even when he is asleep..." And I felt him to be
more fragile still. I felt the need of protecting him, as if he himself were a flame
that might be extinguished by a little puff of wind...
And, as I walked on so, I found the well, at daybreak.
72
 Chapter 25
finding a well, the narrator and the little prince
discuss his return to his planet
"Men," said the little prince, "set out on their way in express trains, but they do
not know what they are looking for. Then they rush about, and get excited,
and turn round and round..."
And he added:
"It is not worth the trouble..."
The well that we had come to was not like the wells of the Sahara. The wells
of the Sahara are mere holes dug in the sand. This one was like a well in a
village. But there was no village here, and I thought I must be dreaming...
"It is strange," I said to the little prince. "Everything is ready for use: the pulley,
the bucket, the rope..."
He laughed, touched the rope, and set the pulley to working. And the pulley
moaned, like an old weathervane which the wind has long since forgotten. 
73
"Do you hear?" said the little prince. "We have wakened the well, and it is
singing..."
I did not want him to tire himself with the rope.
"Leave it to me," I said. "It is too heavy for you."
I hoisted the bucket slowly to the edge of the well and set it there-- happy,
tired as I was, over my achievement. The song of the pulley was still in my
ears, and I could see the sunlight shimmer in the still trembling water.
"I am thirsty for this water," said the little prince. "Give me some of it to
drink..."
And I understood what he had been looking for.
I raised the bucket to his lips. He drank, his eyes closed. It was as sweet as
some special festival treat. This water was indeed a different thing from
ordinary nourishment. Its sweetness was born of the walk under the stars, the
song of the pulley, the effort of my arms. It was good for the heart, like a
present. When I was a little boy, the lights of the Christmas tree, the music of
the Midnight Mass, the tenderness of smiling faces, used to make up, so, the
radiance of the gifts I received.
"The men where you live," said the little prince, "raise five thousand roses in
the same garden-- and they do not find in it what they are looking for."
"They do not find it," I replied.
"And yet what they are looking for could be found in one single rose, or in a
little water."
"Yes, that is true," I said.
And the little prince added:
"But the eyes are blind. One must look with the heart..."
I had drunk the water. I breathed easily. At sunrise the sand is the color of
honey. And that honey color was making me happy, too. What brought me,
then, this sense of grief?
"You must keep your promise," said the little prince, softly, as he sat down
beside me once more.
"What promise?" 
74
"You know-- a muzzle for my sheep... I am responsible for this flower..."
I took my rough drafts of drawings out of my pocket. The little prince looked
them over, and laughed as he said:
"Your baobabs-- they look a little like cabbages."
"Oh!"
I had been so proud of my baobabs!
"Your fox-- his ears look a little like horns; and they are too long."
And he laughed again.
"You are not fair, little prince," I said. "I don't know how to draw anything
except boa constrictors from the outside and boa constrictors from the
inside."
"Oh, that will be all right," he said, "children understand."
So then I made a pencil sketch of a muzzle. And as I gave it to him my heart
was torn.
"You have plans that I do not know about," I said.
But he did not answer me. He said to me, instead:
"You know-- my descent to the earth... Tomorrow will be its anniversary."
Then, after a silence, he went on:
"I came down very near here."
And he flushed.
And once again, without understanding why, I had a queer sense of sorrow.
One question, however, occurred to me:
"Then it was not by chance that on the morning when I first met you-- a week
ago-- you were strolling along like that, all alone, a thousand miles from any
inhabited region? You were on the your back to the place where you landed?"
The little prince flushed again.
And I added, with some hesitancy: 
75
"Perhaps it was because of the anniversary?"
The little prince flushed once more. He never answered questions-- but when
one flushes does that not mean "Yes"?
"Ah," I said to him, "I am a little frightened--"
But he interrupted me.
"Now you must work. You must return to your engine. I will be waiting for you
here. Come back tomorrow evening..."
But I was not reassured. I remembered the fox. One runs the risk of weeping
a little, if one lets himself be tamed...
76
 Chapter 26
the little prince converses with the snake; the little
prince consoles the narrator; the little prince returns
to his planet
Beside the well there was the ruin of an old stone wall. When I came back
from my work, the next evening, I saw from some distance away my little price
sitting on top of a wall, with his feet dangling. And I heard him say:
"Then you don't remember. This is not the exact spot."
Another voice must have answered him, for he replied to it:
"Yes, yes! It is the right day, but this is not the place."
I continued my walk toward the wall. At no time did I see or hear anyone. The
little prince, however, replied once again:
"--Exactly. You will see where my track begins, in the sand. You have nothing
to do but wait for me there. I shall be there tonight."
I was only twenty metres from the wall, and I still saw nothing.
After a silence the little prince spoke again:
"You have good poison? You are sure that it will not make me suffer too
long?"
I stopped in my tracks, my heart torn asunder; but still I did not understand.
"Now go away," said the little prince. "I want to get down from the wall." 
77
I dropped my eyes, then, to the foot of the wall-- and I leaped into the air.
There before me, facing the little prince, was one of those yellow snakes that
take just thirty seconds to bring your life to an end. Even as I was digging into
my pocked to get out my revolver I made a running step back. But, at the
noise I made, the snake let himself flow easily across the sand like the dying
spray of a fountain, and, in no apparent hurry, disappeared, with a light
metallic sound, among the stones.
I reached the wall just in time to catch my little man in my arms; his face was
white as snow.
"What does this mean?" I demanded. "Why are you talking with snakes?"
I had loosened the golden muffler that he always wore. I had moistened his
temples, and had given him some water to drink. And now I did not dare ask
him any more questions. He looked at me very gravely, and put his arms
around my neck. I felt his heart beating like the heart of a dying bird, shot with
someone's rifle...
"I am glad that you have found what was the matter with your engine," he said.
"Now you can go back home--"
"How do you know about that?" 
78
I was just coming to tell him that my work had been successful, beyond
anything that I had dared to hope.
He made no answer to my question, but he added:
"I, too, am going back home today..."
Then, sadly--
"It is much farther... it is much more difficult..."
I realized clearly that something extraordinary was happening. I was holding
him close in my arms as if he were a little child; and yet it seemed to me that
he was rushing headlong toward an abyss from which I could do nothing to
restrain him...
His look was very serious, like some one lost far away.
"I have your sheep. And I have the sheep's box. And I have the muzzle..."
And he gave me a sad smile.
I waited a long time. I could see that he was reviving little by little.
"Dear little man," I said to him, "you are afraid..."
He was afraid, there was no doubt about that. But he laughed lightly.
"I shall be much more afraid this evening..."
Once again I felt myself frozen by the sense of something irreparable. And I
knew that I could not bear the thought of never hearing that laughter any
more. For me, it was like a spring of fresh water in the desert.
"Little man," I said, "I want to hear you laugh again."
But he said to me:
"Tonight, it will be a year... my star, then, can be found right above the place
where I came to the Earth, a year ago..."
"Little man," I said, "tell me that it is only a bad dream-- this affair of the snake,
and the meeting-place, and the star..."
But he did not answer my plea. He said to me, instead: "The thing that is
important is the thing that is not seen..." 
79
"Yes, I know..."
"It is just as it is with the flower. If you love a flower that lives on a star, it is
sweet to look at the sky at night. All the stars are a-bloom with flowers..."
"Yes, I know..."
"It is just as it is with the water. Because of the pulley, and the rope, what you
gave me to drink was like music. You remember-- how good it was."
"Yes, I know..."
"And at night you will look up at the stars. Where I live everything is so small
that I cannot show you where my star is to be found. It is better, like that. My
star will just be one of the stars, for you. And so you will love to watch all the
stars in the heavens... they will all be your friends. And, besides, I am going to
make you a present..."
He laughed again.
"Ah, little prince, dear little prince! I love to hear that laughter!"
"That is my present. Just that. It will be as it was when we drank the water..."
"What are you trying to say?"
"All men have the stars," he answered, "but they are not the same things for
different people. For some, who are travelers, the stars are guides. For others
they are no more than little lights in the sky. For others, who are scholars,
they are problems . For my businessman they were wealth. But all these stars
are silent. You-- you alone-- will have the stars as no one else has them--"
"What are you trying to say?"
"In one of the stars I shall be living. In one of them I shall be laughing. And so
it will be as if all the stars were laughing, when you look at the sky at night...
you-- only you-- will have stars that can laugh!"
And he laughed again.
"And when your sorrow is comforted (time soothes all sorrows) you will be
content that you have known me. You will always be my friend. You will want
to laugh with me. And you will sometimes open your window, so, for that
pleasure... and your friends w ill be properly astonished to see you laughing
as you look up at the sky! Then you will say to them, 'Yes, the stars always 
80
make me laugh!' And they will think you are crazy. It will be a very shabby
trick that I shall have played on you..."
And he laughed again.
"It will be as if, in place of the stars, I had given you a great number of little
bells that knew how to laugh..."
And he laughed again. Then he quickly became serious:
"Tonight-- you know... do not come," said the little prince.
"I shall not leave you," I said.
"I shall look as if I were suffering. I shall look a little as if I were dying. It is like
that. Do not come to see that. It is not worth the trouble..."
"I shall not leave you."
But he was worried.
"I tell you-- it is also because of the snake. He must not bite you. Snakes--
they are malicious creatures. This one might bite you just for fun..."
"I shall not leave you."
But a thought came to reassure him:
"It is true that they have no more poison for a second bite." 
81
That night I did not see him set out on his way. He got away from me without
making a sound. When I succeeded in catching up with him he was walking
along with a quick and resolute step. He said to me merely:
"Ah! You are there..."
And he took me by the hand. But he was still worrying.
"It was wrong of you to come. You will suffer. I shall look as if I were dead;
and that will not be true..."
I said nothing.
"You understand... it is too far. I cannot carry this body with me. It is too
heavy."
I said nothing.
"But it will be like an old abandoned shell. There is nothing sad about old
shells..."
I said nothing.
He was a little discouraged. But he made one more effort:
"You know, it will be very nice. I, too, shall look at the stars. All the stars will
be wells with a rusty pulley. All the stars will pour out fresh water for me to
drink..."
I said nothing.
"That will be so amusing! You will have five hundred million little bells, and I
shall have five hundred million springs of fresh water..."
And he too said nothing more, because he was crying...
"Here it is. Let me go on by myself." 
82
And he sat down, because he was afraid. Then he said, again:
"You know-- my flower... I am responsible for her. And she is so weak! She is
so naive! She has four thorns, of no use at all, to protect herself against all the
world..."
I too sat down, because I was not able to stand up any longer.
"There now-- that is all..."
He still hesitated a little; then he got up. He took one step. I could not move.
There was nothing but a flash of yellow close to his ankle. He remained
motionless for an instant. He did not cry out. He fell as gently as a tree falls.
There was not even any sound, because of the sand.
83
84
 Chapter 27
the narrator's afterthoughts
And now six years have already gone by...
I have never yet told this story. The companions who met me on my return
were well content to see me alive. I was sad, but I told them: "I am tired."
Now my sorrow is comforted a little. That is to say-- not entirely. But I know
that he did go back to his planet, because I did not find his body at daybreak.
It was not such a heavy body... and at night I love to listen to the stars. It is
like five hundred million little bells...
But there is one extraordinary thing... when I drew the muzzle for the little
prince, I forgot to add the leather strap to it. He will never have been able to
fasten it on his sheep. So now I keep wondering: what is happening on his
planet? Perhaps the sheep has eaten the flower...
At one time I say to myself: "Surely not! The little prince shuts his flower under
her glass globe every night, and he watches over his sheep very carefully..."
Then I am happy. And there is sweetness in the laughter of all the stars.
But at another time I say to myself: "At some moment or other one is
absent-minded, and that is enough! On some one evening he forgot the glass
globe, or the sheep got out, without making any noise, in the night..." And
then the little bells are changed to tears...
Here, then, is a great mystery. For you who also love the little prince, and for
me, nothing in the universe can be the same if somewhere, we do not know
where, a sheep that we never saw has-- yes or no?-- eaten a rose...
Look up at the sky. Ask yourselves: is it yes or no? Has the sheep eaten the
flower? And you will see how everything changes...
And no grown-up will ever understand that this is a matter of so much
importance! 
85
This is, to me, the loveliest and saddest landscape in the world. It is the same
as that on the preceding page, but I have drawn it again to impress it on your
memory. It is here that the little prince appeared on Earth, and disappeared.
Look at it carefully so that you will be sure to recognise it in case you travel
some day to the African desert. And, if you should come upon this spot,
please do not hurry on. Wait for a time, exactly under the star. Then, if a little
man appears who laughs, who has golden hair and who refuses to answer
questions, you will know who he is. If this should happen, please comfort me.
Send me word that he has come back.




Antoine de Saint
-Exupéry
LE PETIT PRINCE
1943
Édition du groupe « Ebooks libres et gratuits » 
Table des matières
PREMIER CHAPITRE..............................................................5
CHAPITRE II............................................................................8
CHAPITRE III......................................................................... 13
CHAPITRE IV ......................................................................... 17
CHAPITRE V........................................................................... 21
CHAPITRE VI.........................................................................26
CHAPITRE VII........................................................................28
CHAPITRE VIII ......................................................................32
CHAPITRE IX.........................................................................37
CHAPITRE X .......................................................................... 41
CHAPITRE XI.........................................................................47
CHAPITRE XII........................................................................50
CHAPITRE XIII......................................................................52
CHAPITRE XIV ......................................................................57
CHAPITRE XV........................................................................ 61
CHAPITRE XVI ......................................................................66
CHAPITRE XVII.....................................................................67
CHAPITRE XVIII.................................................................... 71
CHAPITRE XIX ......................................................................73
CHAPITRE XX........................................................................75
– 3 –
CHAPITRE XXI ...................................................................... 77
CHAPITRE XXII.....................................................................84
CHAPITRE XXIII ...................................................................86
CHAPITRE XXIV....................................................................87
CHAPITRE XXV .................................................................... 90
CHAPITRE XXVI....................................................................95
CHAPITRE XXVII ................................................................104
À propos de cette édition électronique................................. 107
– 4 –
À LÉON WERTH
Je demande pardon aux enfants d’avoir dédié ce livre à une
grande personne. J’ai une excuse sérieuse : cette grande personne est le meilleur ami que j’ai au monde. J’ai une autre excuse : cette grande personne peut tout comprendre, même les
livres pour enfants. J’ai une troisième excuse : cette grande personne habite la France où elle a faim et froid. Elle a bien besoin
d’être consolée. Si toutes ces excuses ne suffisent pas, je veux
bien dédier ce livre à l’enfant qu’a été autrefois cette grande personne. Toutes les grandes personnes ont d’abord été des enfants. (Mais peu d’entre elles s’en souviennent.) Je corrige donc
ma dédicace :
À LÉON WERTH
QUAND IL ÉTAIT PETIT GARÇON
– 5 –
PREMIER CHAPITRE
Lorsque j’avais six ans j’ai vu, une fois, une magnifique
image, dans un livre sur la Forêt Vierge qui s’appelait « Histoires Vécues ». Ça représentait un serpent boa qui avalait un
fauve. Voilà la copie du dessin.
On disait dans le livre : « Les serpents boas avalent leur
proie tout entière, sans la mâcher. Ensuite ils ne peuvent plus
bouger et ils dorment pendant les six mois de leur digestion. »
J’ai alors beaucoup réfléchi sur les aventures de la jungle
et, à mon tour, j’ai réussi, avec un crayon de couleur, à tracer
mon premier dessin. Mon dessin numéro 1. Il était comme ça :
J’ai montré mon chef-d’œuvre aux grandes personnes et je
leur ai demandé si mon dessin leur faisait peur.
– 6 –
Elles m’ont répondu : « Pourquoi un chapeau ferait-il
peur ? »
Mon dessin ne représentait pas un chapeau. Il représentait
un serpent boa qui digérait un éléphant. J’ai alors dessiné
l’intérieur du serpent boa, afin que les grandes personnes puissent comprendre. Elles ont toujours besoin d’explications. Mon
dessin numéro 2 était comme ça :
Les grandes personnes m’ont conseillé de laisser de côté les
dessins de serpents boas ouverts ou fermés, et de m’intéresser
plutôt à la géographie, à l’histoire, au calcul et à la grammaire.
C’est ainsi que j’ai abandonné, à l’âge de six ans, une magnifique
carrière de peintre. J’avais été découragé par l’insuccès de mon
dessin numéro 1 et de mon dessin numéro 2. Les grandes personnes ne comprennent jamais rien toutes seules, et c’est fatigant, pour les enfants, de toujours et toujours leur donner des
explications.
J’ai donc dû choisir un autre métier et j’ai appris à piloter
des avions. J’ai volé un peu partout dans le monde. Et la géographie, c’est exact, m’a beaucoup servi. Je savais reconnaître,
du premier coup d’œil, la Chine de l’Arizona. C’est très utile, si
l’on est égaré pendant la nuit.
J’ai ainsi eu, au cours de ma vie, des tas de contacts avec
des tas de gens sérieux. J’ai beaucoup vécu chez les grandes personnes. Je les ai vues de très près. Ça n’a pas trop amélioré mon
opinion.
– 7 –
Quand j’en rencontrais une qui me paraissait un peu lucide, je faisais l’expérience sur elle de mon dessin numéro 1 que
j’ai toujours conservé. Je voulais savoir si elle était vraiment
compréhensive. Mais toujours elle me répondait : « C’est un
chapeau. » Alors je ne lui parlais ni de serpents boas, ni de forêts vierges, ni d’étoiles. Je me mettais à sa portée. Je lui parlais
de bridge, de golf, de politique et de cravates. Et la grande personne était bien contente de connaître un homme aussi raisonnable.
– 8 –
CHAPITRE II
J’ai ainsi vécu seul, sans personne avec qui parler véritablement, jusqu’à une panne dans le désert du Sahara, il y a six
ans. Quelque chose s’était cassé dans mon moteur. Et comme je
n’avais avec moi ni mécanicien, ni passagers, je me préparai à
essayer de réussir, tout seul, une réparation difficile. C’était
pour moi une question de vie ou de mort. J’avais à peine de
l’eau à boire pour huit jours.
Le premier soir je me suis donc endormi sur le sable à mille
milles de toute terre habitée. J’étais bien plus isolé qu’un naufragé sur un radeau au milieu de l’Océan. Alors vous imaginez
ma surprise, au lever du jour, quand une drôle de petite voix
m’a réveillé. Elle disait :
– S’il vous plaît… dessine-moi un mouton !
– Hein !
– Dessine-moi un mouton…
J’ai sauté sur mes pieds comme si j’avais été frappé par la
foudre. J’ai bien frotté mes yeux. J’ai bien regardé. Et j’ai vu un
petit bonhomme tout à fait extraordinaire qui me considérait
gravement. Voilà le meilleur portrait que, plus tard, j’ai réussi à
faire de lui. Mais mon dessin, bien sûr, est beaucoup moins ravissant que le modèle. Ce n’est pas ma faute. J’avais été découragé dans ma carrière de peintre par les grandes personnes, à
l’âge de six ans, et je n’avais rien appris à dessiner, sauf les boas
fermés et les boas ouverts.
– 9 –
Je regardai donc cette apparition avec des yeux tout ronds
d’étonnement. N’oubliez pas que je me trouvais à mille milles de
toute région habitée. Or mon petit bonhomme ne me semblait
ni égaré, ni mort de fatigue, ni mort de faim, ni mort de soif, ni
mort de peur. Il n’avait en rien l’apparence d’un enfant perdu au
milieu du désert, à mille milles de toute région habitée. Quand
je réussis enfin à parler, je lui dis :
– Mais… qu’est-ce que tu fais là ?
Et il me répéta alors, tout doucement, comme une chose
très sérieuse :
– S’il vous plaît… dessine-moi un mouton…
Quand le mystère est trop impressionnant, on n’ose pas désobéir. Aussi absurde que cela me semblât à mille milles de tous
les endroits habités et en danger de mort, je sortis de ma poche
une feuille de papier et un stylographe. Mais je me rappelai
alors que j’avais surtout étudié la géographie, l’histoire, le calcul
et la grammaire et je dis au petit bonhomme (avec un peu de
mauvaise humeur) que je ne savais pas dessiner. Il me répondit :
– Ça ne fait rien. Dessine-moi un mouton.
Comme je n’avais jamais dessiné un mouton je refis, pour
lui, l’un des deux seuls dessins dont j’étais capable. Celui du boa
fermé. Et je fus stupéfait d’entendre le petit bonhomme me répondre :
– Non ! Non ! Je ne veux pas d’un éléphant dans un boa.
Un boa c’est très dangereux, et un éléphant c’est très encombrant. Chez moi c’est tout petit. J’ai besoin d’un mouton. Dessine-moi un mouton.
– 10 –
Alors j’ai dessiné.
Il regarda attentivement, puis :
– Non ! Celui-là est déjà très malade. Fais-en un autre.
Je dessinai :
Mon ami sourit gentiment, avec indulgence :
– Tu vois bien… ce n’est pas un mouton, c’est un bélier. Il a
des cornes…
Je refis donc encore mon dessin :
Mais il fut refusé, comme les précédents :
– 11 –
– Celui-là est trop vieux. Je veux un mouton qui vive longtemps.
Alors, faute de patience, comme j’avais hâte de commencer
le démontage de mon moteur, je griffonnai ce dessin-ci.
Et je lançai :
– Ça c’est la caisse. Le mouton que tu veux est dedans.
Mais je fus bien surpris de voir s’illuminer le visage de mon
jeune juge :
– C’est tout à fait comme ça que je le voulais ! Crois-tu qu’il
faille beaucoup d’herbe à ce mouton ?
– Pourquoi ?
– Parce que chez moi c’est tout petit…
– Ça suffira sûrement. Je t’ai donné un tout petit mouton.
Il pencha la tête vers le dessin :
– Pas si petit que ça… Tiens ! Il s’est endormi…
Et c’est ainsi que je fis la connaissance du petit prince.
– 12 –
Voilà le meilleur portrait que, plus tard, j’ai réussi à faire de lui
– 13 –
CHAPITRE III
Il me fallut longtemps pour comprendre d’où il venait. Le
petit prince, qui me posait beaucoup de questions, ne semblait
jamais entendre les miennes. Ce sont des mots prononcés par
hasard qui, peu à peu, m’ont tout révélé. Ainsi, quand il aperçut
pour la première fois mon avion (je ne dessinerai pas mon
avion, c’est un dessin beaucoup trop compliqué pour moi) il me
demanda :
– Qu’est-ce que c’est que cette chose-là ?
– Ce n’est pas une chose. Ça vole. C’est un avion. C’est mon
avion.
Et j’étais fier de lui apprendre que je volais. Alors il s’écria :
– Comment ! tu es tombé du ciel ?
– Oui, fis-je modestement.
– Ah ! ça c’est drôle…
Et le petit prince eut un très joli éclat de rire qui m’irrita
beaucoup. Je désire que l’on prenne mes malheurs au sérieux.
Puis il ajouta :
– Alors, toi aussi tu viens du ciel ! De quelle planète es-tu ?
J’entrevis aussitôt une lueur, dans le mystère de sa présence, et j’interrogeai brusquement :
– 14 –
– Tu viens donc d’une autre planète ?
Mais il ne me répondit pas. Il hochait la tête doucement
tout en regardant mon avion :
– C’est vrai que, là-dessus, tu ne peux pas venir de bien
loin…
Et il s’enfonça dans une rêverie qui dura longtemps. Puis,
sortant mon mouton de sa poche, il se plongea dans la contemplation de son trésor.
Vous imaginez combien j’avais pu être intrigué par cette
demi-confidence sur « les autres planètes ». Je m’efforçai donc
d’en savoir plus long :
– 15 –
– D’où viens-tu, mon petit bonhomme ? Où est-ce « chez
toi » ? Où veux-tu emporter mon mouton ?
Il me répondit après un silence méditatif :
– Ce qui est bien, avec la caisse que tu m’as donnée, c’est
que, la nuit, ça lui servira de maison.
– Bien sûr. Et si tu es gentil, je te donnerai aussi une corde
pour l’attacher pendant le jour. Et un piquet.
La proposition parut choquer le petit prince :
– L’attacher ? Quelle drôle d’idée !
– Mais si tu ne l’attaches pas, il ira n’importe où, et il se
perdra…
Et mon ami eut un nouvel éclat de rire :
– Mais où veux-tu qu’il aille !
– N’importe où. Droit devant lui…
Alors le petit prince remarqua gravement :
– Ça ne fait rien, c’est tellement petit, chez moi !
Et, avec un peu de mélancolie, peut-être, il ajouta :
– Droit devant soi on ne peut pas aller bien loin…
– 16
–
– 17 –
CHAPITRE IV
J’avais ainsi appris une seconde chose très importante :
C’est que sa planète d’origine était à peine plus grande qu’une
maison !
Ça ne pouvait pas m’étonner beaucoup. Je savais bien
qu’en dehors des grosses planètes comme la Terre, Jupiter,
Mars, Vénus, auxquelles on a donné des noms, il y en a des centaines d’autres qui sont quelquefois si petites qu’on a beaucoup
de mal à les apercevoir au télescope. Quand un astronome découvre l’une d’elles, il lui donne pour nom un numéro. Il
l’appelle par exemple : « l’astéroïde 3251. »
J’ai de sérieuses raisons de croire que la planète d’où venait
le petit prince est l’astéroïde B 612. Cet astéroïde n’a été aperçu
qu’une fois au télescope, en 1909, par un astronome turc.
– 18 –
Il avait fait alors une grande démonstration de sa découverte à un Congrès International d’Astronomie. Mais personne
ne l’avait cru à cause de son costume. Les grandes personnes
sont comme ça.
Heureusement pour la réputation de l’astéroïde B 612 un
dictateur turc imposa à son peuple, sous peine de mort, de
s’habiller à l’Européenne. L’astronome refit sa démonstration
en 1920, dans un habit très élégant. Et cette fois-ci tout le
monde fut de son avis.
Si je vous ai raconté ces détails sur l’astéroïde B 612 et si je
vous ai confié son numéro, c’est à cause des grandes personnes.
Les grandes personnes aiment les chiffres. Quand vous leur par-
– 19 –
lez d’un nouvel ami, elles ne vous questionnent jamais sur
l’essentiel. Elles ne vous disent jamais : « Quel est le son de sa
voix ? Quels sont les jeux qu’il préfère ? Est-ce qu’il collectionne
les papillons ? » Elles vous demandent : « Quel âge a-t-il ?
Combien a-t-il de frères ? Combien pèse-t-il ? Combien gagne
son père ? » Alors seulement elles croient le connaître. Si vous
dites aux grandes personnes : « J’ai vu une belle maison en
briques roses, avec des géraniums aux fenêtres et des colombes
sur le toit… » elles ne parviennent pas à s’imaginer cette maison. Il faut leur dire : « J’ai vu une maison de cent mille
francs. » Alors elles s’écrient : « Comme c’est joli ! »
Ainsi, si vous leur dites : « La preuve que le petit prince a
existé c’est qu’il était ravissant, qu’il riait, et qu’il voulait un
mouton. Quand on veut un mouton, c’est la preuve qu’on
existe » elles hausseront les épaules et vous traiteront d’enfant !
Mais si vous leur dites : « La planète d’où il venait est l’astéroïde
B 612 » alors elles seront convaincues, et elles vous laisseront
tranquille avec leurs questions. Elles sont comme ça. Il ne faut
pas leur en vouloir. Les enfants doivent être très indulgents envers les grandes personnes.
Mais, bien sûr, nous qui comprenons la vie, nous nous moquons bien des numéros ! J’aurais aimé commencer cette histoire à la façon des contes de fées. J’aurais aimé dire :
« Il était une fois un petit prince qui habitait une planète à
peine plus grande que lui, et qui avait besoin d’un ami… » Pour
ceux qui comprennent la vie, ça aurait eu l’air beaucoup plus
vrai.
Car je n’aime pas qu’on lise mon livre à la légère. J’éprouve
tant de chagrin à raconter ces souvenirs. Il y a six ans déjà que
mon ami s’en est allé avec son mouton. Si j’essaie ici de le décrire, c’est afin de ne pas l’oublier. C’est triste d’oublier un ami.
Tout le monde n’a pas eu un ami. Et je puis devenir comme les 
– 20 –
grandes personnes qui ne s’intéressent plus qu’aux chiffres.
C’est donc pour ça encore que j’ai acheté une boîte de couleurs
et des crayons. C’est dur de se remettre au dessin, à mon âge,
quand on n’a jamais fait d’autres tentatives que celle d’un boa
fermé et celle d’un boa ouvert, à l’âge de six ans ! J’essaierai,
bien sûr, de faire des portraits le plus ressemblants possible.
Mais je ne suis pas tout à fait certain de réussir. Un dessin va, et
l’autre ne ressemble plus. Je me trompe un peu aussi sur la
taille. Ici le petit prince est trop grand. Là il est trop petit.
J’hésite aussi sur la couleur de son costume. Alors je tâtonne
comme ci et comme ça, tant bien que mal. Je me tromperai enfin sur certains détails plus importants. Mais ça, il faudra me le
pardonner. Mon ami ne donnait jamais d’explications. Il me
croyait peut-être semblable à lui. Mais moi, malheureusement,
je ne sais pas voir les moutons à travers les caisses. Je suis peutêtre un peu comme les grandes personnes. J’ai dû vieillir.
– 21 –
CHAPITRE V
Chaque jour j’apprenais quelque chose sur la planète, sur le
départ, sur le voyage. Ça venait tout doucement, au hasard des
réflexions. C’est ainsi que, le troisième jour, je connus le drame
des baobabs.
Cette fois-ci encore ce fut grâce au mouton, car brusquement le petit prince m’interrogea, comme pris d’un doute
grave :
– C’est bien vrai, n’est-ce pas, que les moutons mangent les
arbustes ?
– Oui. C’est vrai.
– Ah ! Je suis content.
Je ne compris pas pourquoi il était si important que les
moutons mangeassent les arbustes. Mais le petit prince ajouta :
– Par conséquent ils mangent aussi les baobabs ?
Je fis remarquer au petit prince que les baobabs ne sont
pas des arbustes, mais des arbres grands comme des églises et
que, si même il emportait avec lui tout un troupeau d’éléphants,
ce troupeau ne viendrait pas à bout d’un seul baobab.
L’idée du troupeau d’éléphants fit rire le petit prince :
– Il faudrait les mettre les uns sur les autres…
– 22 –
Mais il remarqua avec sagesse :
– Les baobabs, avant de grandir, ça commence par être petit.
– C’est exact ! Mais pourquoi veux-tu que tes moutons
mangent les petits baobabs ?
Il me répondit : « Ben ! Voyons ! » comme s’il s’agissait là
d’une évidence. Et il me fallut un grand effort d’intelligence
pour comprendre à moi seul ce problème.
Et en effet, sur la planète du petit prince, il y avait comme
sur toutes les planètes, de bonnes herbes et de mauvaises
herbes. Par conséquent de bonnes graines de bonnes herbes et
de mauvaises graines de mauvaises herbes. Mais les graines
sont invisibles. Elles dorment dans le secret de la terre jusqu’à
ce qu’il prenne fantaisie à l’une d’elles de se réveiller. Alors elle
s’étire, et pousse d’abord timidement vers le soleil une ravissante petite brindille inoffensive. S’il s’agit d’une brindille de 
– 23 –
radis ou de rosier, on peut la laisser pousser comme elle veut.
Mais s’il s’agit d’une mauvaise plante, il faut arracher la plante
aussitôt, dès qu’on a su la reconnaître. Or il y avait des graines
terribles sur la planète du petit prince… c’étaient les graines de
baobabs. Le sol de la planète en était infesté. Or un baobab, si
l’on s’y prend trop tard, on ne peut jamais plus s’en débarrasser.
Il encombre toute la planète. Il la perfore de ses racines. Et si la
planète est trop petite, et si les baobabs sont trop nombreux, ils
la font éclater.
« C’est une question de discipline, me disait plus tard le petit prince. Quand on a terminé sa toilette du matin, il faut faire
soigneusement la toilette de la planète. Il faut s’astreindre régulièrement à arracher les baobabs dès qu’on les distingue d’avec
les rosiers auxquels ils ressemblent beaucoup quand ils sont
très jeunes. C’est un travail très ennuyeux, mais très facile. »
– 24 –
Et un jour il me conseilla de m’appliquer à réussir un beau
dessin, pour bien faire entrer ça dans la tête des enfants de chez
moi. « S’ils voyagent un jour, me disait-il, ça pourra leur servir.
Il est quelquefois sans inconvénient de remettre à plus tard son
travail. Mais, s’il s’agit des baobabs, c’est toujours une catastrophe. J’ai connu une planète, habitée par un paresseux. Il
avait négligé trois arbustes… »
Et, sur les indications du petit prince, j’ai dessiné cette planète-là. Je n’aime guère prendre le ton d’un moraliste. Mais le
danger des baobabs est si peu connu, et les risques courus par
celui qui s’égarerait dans un astéroïde sont si considérables,
que, pour une fois, je fais exception à ma réserve. Je dis : « Enfants ! Faites attention aux baobabs ! » C’est pour avertir mes
amis d’un danger qu’ils frôlaient depuis longtemps, comme
moi-même, sans le connaître, que j’ai tant travaillé ce dessin-là.
La leçon que je donnais en valait la peine. Vous vous demanderez peut-être : Pourquoi n’y a-t-il pas, dans ce livre, d’autres
dessins aussi grandioses que le dessin des baobabs ? La réponse
est bien simple : J’ai essayé mais je n’ai pas pu réussir. Quand
j’ai dessiné les baobabs j’ai été animé par le sentiment de
l’urgence.
– 25
–
– 26 –
CHAPITRE VI
Ah ! petit prince, j’ai compris, peu à peu, ainsi, ta petite vie
mélancolique. Tu n’avais eu longtemps pour distraction que la
douceur des couchers de soleil. J’ai appris ce détail nouveau, le
quatrième jour au matin, quand tu m’as dit :
– J’aime bien les couchers de soleil. Allons voir un coucher
de soleil…
– Mais il faut attendre…
– Attendre quoi ?
– Attendre que le soleil se couche.
Tu as eu l’air très surpris d’abord, et puis tu as ri de toimême. Et tu m’as dit :
– Je me crois toujours chez moi !
En effet. Quand il est midi aux États-Unis, le soleil, tout le
monde le sait, se couche sur la France. Il suffirait de pouvoir
aller en France en une minute pour assister au coucher de soleil.
Malheureusement la France est bien trop éloignée. Mais, sur ta
si petite planète, il te suffisait de tirer ta chaise de quelques pas.
Et tu regardais le crépuscule chaque fois que tu le désirais…
– Un jour, j’ai vu le soleil se coucher quarante-trois fois !
Et un peu plus tard tu ajoutais :
– 27 –
– Tu sais… quand on est tellement triste on aime les couchers de soleil…
– Le jour des quarante-trois fois tu étais donc tellement
triste ?
Mais le petit prince ne répondit pas.
– 28 –
CHAPITRE VII
Le cinquième jour, toujours grâce au mouton, ce secret de
la vie du petit prince me fut révélé. Il me demanda avec brusquerie, sans préambule, comme le fruit d’un problème longtemps médité en silence :
– Un mouton, s’il mange les arbustes, il mange aussi les
fleurs ?
– Un mouton mange tout ce qu’il rencontre.
– Même les fleurs qui ont des épines ?
– Oui. Même les fleurs qui ont des épines.
– Alors les épines, à quoi servent-elles ?
Je ne le savais pas. J’étais alors très occupé à essayer de
dévisser un boulon trop serré de mon moteur. J’étais très soucieux car ma panne commençait de m’apparaître comme très
grave, et l’eau à boire qui s’épuisait me faisait craindre le pire.
– Les épines, à quoi servent-elles ?
Le petit prince ne renonçait jamais à une question, une fois
qu’il l’avait posée. J’étais irrité par mon boulon et je répondis
n’importe quoi :
– Les épines, ça ne sert à rien, c’est de la pure méchanceté
de la part des fleurs !
– 29 –
– Oh !
Mais après un silence il me lança, avec une sorte de rancune :
– Je ne te crois pas ! Les fleurs sont faibles. Elles sont
naïves. Elles se rassurent comme elles peuvent. Elles se croient
terribles avec leurs épines…
Je ne répondis rien. À cet instant-là je me disais : « Si ce
boulon résiste encore, je le ferai sauter d’un coup de marteau. »
Le petit prince dérangea de nouveau mes réflexions :
– Et tu crois, toi, que les fleurs…
– Mais non ! Mais non ! Je ne crois rien ! J’ai répondu
n’importe quoi. Je m’occupe, moi, de choses sérieuses !
Il me regarda stupéfait.
– De choses sérieuses !
Il me voyait, mon marteau à la main, et les doigts noirs de
cambouis, penché sur un objet qui lui semblait très laid.
– Tu parles comme les grandes personnes !
Ça me fit un peu honte. Mais, impitoyable, il ajouta :
– Tu confonds tout… tu mélanges tout !
Il était vraiment très irrité. Il secouait au vent des cheveux
tout dorés :
– 30 –
– Je connais une planète où il y a un Monsieur cramoisi. Il
n’a jamais respiré une fleur. Il n’a jamais regardé une étoile. Il
n’a jamais aimé personne. Il n’a jamais rien fait d’autre que des
additions. Et toute la journée il répète comme toi : « Je suis un
homme sérieux ! Je suis un homme sérieux ! » et ça le fait gonfler d’orgueil. Mais ce n’est pas un homme, c’est un champignon !
– Un quoi ?
– Un champignon !
Le petit prince était maintenant tout pâle de colère.
– Il y a des millions d’années que les fleurs fabriquent des
épines. Il y a des millions d’années que les moutons mangent
quand même les fleurs. Et ce n’est pas sérieux de chercher à
comprendre pourquoi elles se donnent tant de mal pour se fabriquer des épines qui ne servent jamais à rien ? Ce n’est pas
important la guerre des moutons et des fleurs ? Ce n’est pas plus
sérieux et plus important que les additions d’un gros Monsieur
rouge ? Et si je connais, moi, une fleur unique au monde, qui
n’existe nulle part, sauf dans ma planète, et qu’un petit mouton
peut anéantir d’un seul coup, comme ça, un matin, sans se
rendre compte de ce qu’il fait, ce n’est pas important ça !
Il rougit, puis reprit :
– Si quelqu’un aime une fleur qui n’existe qu’à un exemplaire dans les millions et les millions d’étoiles, ça suffit pour
qu’il soit heureux quand il les regarde. Il se dit : « Ma fleur est là
quelque part… » Mais si le mouton mange la fleur, c’est pour lui
comme si, brusquement, toutes les étoiles s’éteignaient ! Et ce
n’est pas important ça !
– 31 –
Il ne put rien dire de plus. Il éclata brusquement en sanglots. La nuit était tombée. J’avais lâché mes outils. Je me moquais bien de mon marteau, de mon boulon, de la soif et de la
mort. Il y avait, sur une étoile, une planète, la mienne, la Terre,
un petit prince à consoler ! Je le pris dans les bras. Je le berçai.
Je lui disais : « La fleur que tu aimes n’est pas en danger… Je lui
dessinerai une muselière, à ton mouton… Je te dessinerai une
armure pour ta fleur… Je… » Je ne savais pas trop quoi dire. Je
me sentais très maladroit. Je ne savais comment l’atteindre, où
le rejoindre… C’est tellement mystérieux, le pays des larmes.
– 32 –
CHAPITRE VIII
J’appris bien vite à mieux connaître cette fleur. Il y avait
toujours eu, sur la planète du petit prince, des fleurs très
simples, ornées d’un seul rang de pétales, et qui ne tenaient
point de place, et qui ne dérangeaient personne. Elles apparaissaient un matin dans l’herbe, et puis elles s’éteignaient le soir.
Mais celle-là avait germé un jour, d’une graine apportée d’on ne
sait où, et le petit prince avait surveillé de très près cette brindille qui ne ressemblait pas aux autres brindilles. Ça pouvait
être un nouveau genre de baobab. Mais l’arbuste cessa vite de
croître, et commença de préparer une fleur. Le petit prince, qui
assistait à l’installation d’un bouton énorme, sentait bien qu’il
en sortirait une apparition miraculeuse, mais la fleur n’en finissait pas de se préparer à être belle, à l’abri de sa chambre verte.
flag{9r3p_1n5t34d_0f_r34d1n9}
Elle choisissait avec soin ses couleurs. Elle s’habillait lentement,
elle ajustait un à un ses pétales. Elle ne voulait pas sortir toute
fripée comme les coquelicots. Elle ne voulait apparaître que
dans le plein rayonnement de sa beauté. Eh ! oui. Elle était très
coquette ! Sa toilette mystérieuse avait donc duré des jours et
des jours. Et puis voici qu’un matin, justement à l’heure du lever
du soleil, elle s’était montrée.
Et elle, qui avait travaillé avec tant de précision, dit en bâillant :
– Ah ! Je me réveille à peine… Je vous demande pardon…
Je suis encore toute décoiffée…
Le petit prince, alors, ne put contenir son admiration :
– 33 –
– Que vous êtes belle !
– N’est-ce pas, répondit doucement la fleur. Et je suis née
en même temps que le soleil…
Le petit prince devina bien qu’elle n’était pas trop modeste,
mais elle était si émouvante !
– C’est l’heure, je crois, du petit déjeuner, avait-elle bientôt
ajouté, auriez-vous la bonté de penser à moi…
Et le petit prince, tout confus, ayant été chercher un arrosoir d’eau fraîche, avait servi la fleur.
– 34 –
Ainsi l’avait-elle bien vite tourmenté par sa vanité un peu
ombrageuse. Un jour, par exemple, parlant de ses quatre épines,
elle avait dit au petit prince :
– Ils peuvent venir, les tigres, avec leurs griffes !
– Il n’y a pas de tigres sur ma planète, avait objecté le petit
prince, et puis les tigres ne mangent pas l’herbe.
– Je ne suis pas une herbe, avait doucement répondu la
fleur.
– Pardonnez-moi…
– Je ne crains rien des tigres, mais j’ai horreur des courants d’air. Vous n’auriez pas un paravent ?
« Horreur des courants d’air… ce n’est pas de chance, pour
une plante, avait remarqué le petit prince. Cette fleur est bien
compliquée… »
– Le soir vous me mettrez sous globe. Il fait très froid chez
vous. C’est mal installé. Là d’où je viens…
– 35 –
Mais elle s’était interrompue. Elle était venue sous forme
de graine. Elle n’avait rien pu connaître des autres mondes.
Humiliée de s’être laissé surprendre à préparer un mensonge
aussi naïf, elle avait toussé deux ou trois fois, pour mettre le petit prince dans son tort :
– Ce paravent ?…
– J’allais le chercher mais vous me parliez !
Alors elle avait forcé sa toux pour lui infliger quand même
des remords.
Ainsi le petit prince, malgré la bonne volonté de son
amour, avait vite douté d’elle. Il avait pris au sérieux des mots
sans importance, et était devenu très malheureux.
« J’aurais dû ne pas l’écouter, me confia-t-il un jour, il ne
faut jamais écouter les fleurs. Il faut les regarder et les respirer.
La mienne embaumait ma planète, mais je ne savais pas m’en
réjouir. Cette histoire de griffes, qui m’avait tellement agacé, eût
dû m’attendrir… »
– 36 –
Il me confia encore :
« Je n’ai alors rien su comprendre ! J’aurais dû la juger sur
les actes et non sur les mots. Elle m’embaumait et m’éclairait. Je
n’aurais jamais dû m’enfuir ! J’aurais dû deviner sa tendresse
derrière ses pauvres ruses. Les fleurs sont si contradictoires !
Mais j’étais trop jeune pour savoir l’aimer. »
– 37 –
CHAPITRE IX
Je crois qu’il profita, pour son évasion, d’une migration
d’oiseaux sauvages. Au matin du départ il mit sa planète bien en
ordre. Il ramona soigneusement ses volcans en activité. Il pos-
– 38 –
sédait deux volcans en activité. Et c’était bien commode pour
faire chauffer le petit déjeuner du matin. Il possédait aussi un
volcan éteint. Mais, comme il disait, « On ne sait jamais ! » Il
ramona donc également le volcan éteint. S’ils sont bien ramonés, les volcans brûlent doucement et régulièrement, sans éruptions. Les éruptions volcaniques sont comme des feux de cheminée. Évidemment sur notre terre nous sommes beaucoup
trop petits pour ramoner nos volcans. C’est pourquoi ils nous
causent des tas d’ennuis.
– 39 –
Le petit prince arracha aussi, avec un peu de mélancolie,
les dernières pousses de baobabs. Il croyait ne jamais devoir
revenir. Mais tous ces travaux familiers lui parurent, ce matinlà, extrêmement doux. Et, quand il arrosa une dernière fois la
fleur, et se prépara à la mettre à l’abri sous son globe, il se découvrit l’envie de pleurer.
– Adieu, dit-il à la fleur.
Mais elle ne lui répondit pas.
– Adieu, répéta-t-il.
La fleur toussa. Mais ce n’était pas à cause de son rhume.
– J’ai été sotte, lui dit-elle enfin. Je te demande pardon.
Tâche d’être heureux.
Il fut surpris par l’absence de reproches. Il restait là tout
déconcerté, le globe en l’air. Il ne comprenait pas cette douceur
calme.
– Mais oui, je t’aime, lui dit la fleur. Tu n’en as rien su, par
ma faute. Cela n’a aucune importance. Mais tu as été aussi sot
que moi. Tâche d’être heureux… Laisse ce globe tranquille. Je
n’en veux plus.
– Mais le vent…
– Je ne suis pas si enrhumée que ça… L’air frais de la nuit
me fera du bien. Je suis une fleur.
– Mais les bêtes…
– Il faut bien que je supporte deux ou trois chenilles si je
veux connaître les papillons. Il paraît que c’est tellement beau. 
– 40 –
Sinon qui me rendra visite ? Tu seras loin, toi. Quant aux
grosses bêtes, je ne crains rien. J’ai mes griffes.
Et elle montrait naïvement ses quatre épines. Puis elle
ajouta :
– Ne traîne pas comme ça, c’est agaçant. Tu as décidé de
partir. Va-t’en.
Car elle ne voulait pas qu’il la vît pleurer. C’était une fleur
tellement orgueilleuse…
– 41 –
CHAPITRE X
Il se trouvait dans la région des astéroïdes 325, 326, 327,
328, 329 et 330. Il commença donc par les visiter pour y chercher une occupation et pour s’instruire.
La première était habitée par un roi. Le roi siégeait, habillé
de pourpre et d’hermine, sur un trône très simple et cependant
majestueux.
– 42 –
– Ah ! Voilà un sujet, s’écria le roi quand il aperçut le petit
prince.
Et le petit prince se demanda :
« Comment peut-il me reconnaître puisqu’il ne m’a encore
jamais vu ! »
Il ne savait pas que, pour les rois, le monde est très simplifié. Tous les hommes sont des sujets.
– Approche-toi que je te voie mieux, lui dit le roi qui était
tout fier d’être roi pour quelqu’un.
Le petit prince chercha des yeux où s’asseoir, mais la planète était toute encombrée par le magnifique manteau
d’hermine. Il resta donc debout, et, comme il était fatigué, il
bâilla.
– Il est contraire à l’étiquette de bâiller en présence d’un
roi, lui dit le monarque. Je te l’interdis.
– Je ne peux pas m’en empêcher, répondit le petit prince
tout confus. J’ai fait un long voyage et je n’ai pas dormi…
– Alors, lui dit le roi, je t’ordonne de bâiller. Je n’ai vu personne bâiller depuis des années. Les bâillements sont pour moi
des curiosités. Allons ! bâille encore. C’est un ordre.
– Ça m’intimide… je ne peux plus… fit le petit prince tout
rougissant.
– Hum ! Hum ! répondit le roi. Alors je… je t’ordonne tantôt de bâiller et tantôt de…
Il bredouillait un peu et paraissait vexé.
– 43 –
Car le roi tenait essentiellement à ce que son autorité fût
respectée. Il ne tolérait pas la désobéissance. C’était un monarque absolu. Mais, comme il était très bon, il donnait des
ordres raisonnables.
« Si j’ordonnais, disait-il couramment, si j’ordonnais à un
général de se changer en oiseau de mer, et si le général
n’obéissait pas, ce ne serait pas la faute du général. Ce serait ma
faute. »
– Puis-je m’asseoir ? s’enquit timidement le petit prince.
– Je t’ordonne de t’asseoir, lui répondit le roi, qui ramena
majestueusement un pan de son manteau d’hermine.
Mais le petit prince s’étonnait. La planète était minuscule.
Sur quoi le roi pouvait-il bien régner ?
– Sire, lui dit-il… je vous demande pardon de vous interroger…
– Je t’ordonne de m’interroger, se hâta de dire le roi.
– Sire… sur quoi régnez-vous ?
– Sur tout, répondit le roi, avec une grande simplicité.
– Sur tout ?
Le roi d’un geste discret désigna sa planète, les autres planètes et les étoiles.
– Sur tout ça ? dit le petit prince.
– Sur tout ça… répondit le roi.
– 44 –
Car non seulement c’était un monarque absolu mais c’était
un monarque universel.
– Et les étoiles vous obéissent ?
– Bien sûr, lui dit le roi. Elles obéissent aussitôt. Je ne tolère pas l’indiscipline.
Un tel pouvoir émerveilla le petit prince. S’il l’avait détenu
lui-même, il aurait pu assister, non pas à quarante-quatre, mais
à soixante-douze, ou même à cent, ou même à deux cents couchers de soleil dans la même journée, sans avoir jamais à tirer
sa chaise ! Et comme il se sentait un peu triste à cause du souvenir de sa petite planète abandonnée, il s’enhardit à solliciter
une grâce du roi :
– Je voudrais voir un coucher de soleil… Faites-moi plaisir… Ordonnez au soleil de se coucher…
– Si j’ordonnais à un général de voler d’une fleur à l’autre à
la façon d’un papillon, ou d’écrire une tragédie, ou de se changer
en oiseau de mer, et si le général n’exécutait pas l’ordre reçu,
qui, de lui ou de moi, serait dans son tort ?
– Ce serait vous, dit fermement le petit prince.
– Exact. Il faut exiger de chacun ce que chacun peut donner, reprit le roi. L’autorité repose d’abord sur la raison. Si tu
ordonnes à ton peuple d’aller se jeter à la mer, il fera la révolution. J’ai le droit d’exiger l’obéissance parce que mes ordres sont
raisonnables.
– Alors mon coucher de soleil ? rappela le petit prince qui
jamais n’oubliait une question une fois qu’il l’avait posée.
– 45 –
– Ton coucher de soleil, tu l’auras. Je l’exigerai. Mais
j’attendrai, dans ma science du gouvernement, que les conditions soient favorables.
– Quand ça sera-t-il ? s’informa le petit prince.
– Hem ! hem ! lui répondit le roi, qui consulta d’abord un
gros calendrier, hem ! hem ! ce sera, vers… vers… ce sera ce soir
vers sept heures quarante ! Et tu verras comme je suis bien obéi.
Le petit prince bâilla. Il regrettait son coucher de soleil
manqué. Et puis il s’ennuyait déjà un peu :
– Je n’ai plus rien à faire ici, dit-il au roi. Je vais repartir !
– Ne pars pas, répondit le roi qui était si fier d’avoir un sujet. Ne pars pas, je te fais ministre !
– Ministre de quoi ?
– De… de la justice !
– Mais il n’y a personne à juger !
– On ne sait pas, lui dit le roi. Je n’ai pas fait encore le tour
de mon royaume. Je suis très vieux, je n’ai pas de place pour un
carrosse, et ça me fatigue de marcher.
– Oh ! Mais j’ai déjà vu, dit le petit prince qui se pencha
pour jeter encore un coup d’œil sur l’autre côté de la planète. Il
n’y a personne là-bas non plus…
– Tu te jugeras donc toi-même, lui répondit le roi. C’est le
plus difficile. Il est bien plus difficile de se juger soi-même que
de juger autrui. Si tu réussis à bien te juger, c’est que tu es un
véritable sage.
– 46 –
– Moi, dit le petit prince, je puis me juger moi-même
n’importe où. Je n’ai pas besoin d’habiter ici.
– Hem ! Hem ! dit le roi, je crois bien que sur ma planète il
y a quelque part un vieux rat. Je l’entends la nuit. Tu pourras
juger ce vieux rat. Tu le condamneras à mort de temps en
temps. Ainsi sa vie dépendra de ta justice. Mais tu le gracieras
chaque fois pour l’économiser. Il n’y en a qu’un.
– Moi, répondit le petit prince, je n’aime pas condamner à
mort, et je crois bien que je m’en vais.
– Non, dit le roi.
Mais le petit prince, ayant achevé ses préparatifs, ne voulut
point peiner le vieux monarque :
– Si Votre Majesté désirait être obéie ponctuellement, elle
pourrait me donner un ordre raisonnable. Elle pourrait
m’ordonner, par exemple, de partir avant une minute. Il me
semble que les conditions sont favorables…
Le roi n’ayant rien répondu, le petit prince hésita d’abord,
puis, avec un soupir, prit le départ.
– Je te fais mon ambassadeur, se hâta alors de crier le roi.
Il avait un grand air d’autorité.
« Les grandes personnes sont bien étranges », se dit le petit
prince, en lui-même, durant son voyage.
– 47 –
CHAPITRE XI
La seconde planète était habitée par un vaniteux :
– Ah ! Ah ! Voilà la visite d’un admirateur ! s’écria de loin
le vaniteux dès qu’il aperçut le petit prince.
Car, pour les vaniteux, les autres hommes sont des admirateurs.
– 48 –
– Bonjour, dit le petit prince. Vous avez un drôle de chapeau.
– C’est pour saluer, lui répondit le vaniteux. C’est pour saluer quand on m’acclame. Malheureusement il ne passe jamais
personne par ici.
– Ah oui ? dit le petit prince qui ne comprit pas.
– Frappe tes mains l’une contre l’autre, conseilla donc le
vaniteux.
Le petit prince frappa ses mains l’une contre l’autre. Le vaniteux salua modestement en soulevant son chapeau.
« Ça c’est plus amusant que la visite au roi », se dit en luimême le petit prince. Et il recommença de frapper ses mains
l’une contre l’autre. Le vaniteux recommença de saluer en soulevant son chapeau.
Après cinq minutes d’exercice le petit prince se fatigua de
la monotonie du jeu :
– Et, pour que le chapeau tombe, demanda-t-il, que faut-il
faire ?
Mais le vaniteux ne l’entendit pas. Les vaniteux
n’entendent jamais que les louanges.
– Est-ce que tu m’admires vraiment beaucoup ? demandat-il au petit prince.
– Qu’est-ce que signifie admirer ?
– 49 –
– Admirer signifie reconnaître que je suis l’homme le plus
beau, le mieux habillé, le plus riche et le plus intelligent de la
planète.
– Mais tu es seul sur ta planète !
– Fais-moi ce plaisir. Admire-moi quand même !
– Je t’admire, dit le petit prince, en haussant un peu les
épaules, mais en quoi cela peut-il bien t’intéresser ?
Et le petit prince s’en fut.
« Les grandes personnes sont décidément bien bizarres »,
se dit-il simplement en lui-même durant son voyage.
– 50 –
CHAPITRE XII
La planète suivante était habitée par un buveur. Cette visite
fut très courte, mais elle plongea le petit prince dans une grande
mélancolie :
– Que fais-tu là ? dit-il au buveur, qu’il trouva installé en
silence devant une collection de bouteilles vides et une collection de bouteilles pleines.
– Je bois, répondit le buveur, d’un air lugubre.
– Pourquoi bois-tu ? lui demanda le petit prince.
– 51 –
– Pour oublier, répondit le buveur.
– Pour oublier quoi ? s’enquit le petit prince qui déjà le
plaignait.
– Pour oublier que j’ai honte, avoua le buveur en baissant
la tête.
– Honte de quoi ? s’informa le petit prince qui désirait le
secourir.
– Honte de boire ! acheva le buveur qui s’enferma définitivement dans le silence.
Et le petit prince s’en fut, perplexe.
« Les grandes personnes sont décidément très très bizarres », se disait-il en lui-même durant le voyage.
– 52 –
CHAPITRE XIII
La quatrième planète était celle du businessman. Cet
homme était si occupé qu’il ne leva même pas la tête à l’arrivée
du petit prince.
– Bonjour, lui dit celui-ci. Votre cigarette est éteinte.
– Trois et deux font cinq. Cinq et sept douze. Douze et trois
quinze. Bonjour. Quinze et sept vingt-deux. Vingt-deux et six
vingt-huit. Pas le temps de la rallumer. Vingt-six et cinq trente
et un. Ouf ! Ça fait donc cinq cent un millions six cent vingtdeux mille sept cent trente et un.
– 53 –
– Cinq cents millions de quoi ?
– Hein ? Tu es toujours là ? Cinq cent un millions de… je ne
sais plus… J’ai tellement de travail ! Je suis sérieux, moi, je ne
m’amuse pas à des balivernes ! Deux et cinq sept…
– Cinq cent un millions de quoi ? répéta le petit prince qui
jamais de sa vie, n’avait renoncé à une question, une fois qu’il
l’avait posée.
Le businessman leva la tête :
– Depuis cinquante-quatre ans que j’habite cette planèteci, je n’ai été dérangé que trois fois. La première fois ç’a été, il y
a vingt-deux ans, par un hanneton qui était tombé Dieu sait
d’où. Il répandait un bruit épouvantable, et j’ai fait quatre erreurs dans une addition. La seconde fois ç’a été, il y a onze ans,
par une crise de rhumatisme. Je manque d’exercice. Je n’ai pas
le temps de flâner. Je suis sérieux, moi. La troisième fois… la
voici ! Je disais donc cinq cent un millions…
– Millions de quoi ?
Le businessman comprit qu’il n’était point d’espoir de
paix :
– Millions de ces petites choses que l’on voit quelquefois
dans le ciel.
– Des mouches ?
– Mais non, des petites choses qui brillent.
– Des abeilles ?
– 54 –
– Mais non. Des petites choses dorées qui font rêvasser les
fainéants. Mais je suis sérieux, moi ! Je n’ai pas le temps de rêvasser.
– Ah ! des étoiles ?
– C’est bien ça. Des étoiles.
– Et que fais-tu de cinq cents millions d’étoiles ?
– Cinq cent un millions six cent vingt-deux mille sept cent
trente et un. Je suis sérieux, moi, je suis précis.
– Et que fais-tu de ces étoiles ?
– Ce que j’en fais ?
– Oui.
– Rien. Je les possède.
– Tu possèdes les étoiles ?
– Oui.
– Mais j’ai déjà vu un roi qui…
– Les rois ne possèdent pas. Ils « règnent » sur. C’est très
différent.
– Et à quoi cela te sert-il de posséder les étoiles ?
– Ça me sert à être riche.
– Et à quoi cela te sert-il d’être riche ?
– 55 –
– À acheter d’autres étoiles, si quelqu’un en trouve.
« Celui-là, se dit en lui-même le petit prince, il raisonne un
peu comme mon ivrogne. »
Cependant il posa encore des questions :
– Comment peut-on posséder les étoiles ?
– À qui sont-elles ? riposta, grincheux, le businessman.
– Je ne sais pas. À personne.
– Alors elles sont à moi, car j’y ai pensé le premier.
– Ça suffit ?
– Bien sûr. Quand tu trouves un diamant qui n’est à personne, il est à toi. Quand tu trouves une île qui n’est à personne,
elle est à toi. Quand tu as une idée le premier, tu la fais breveter : elle est à toi. Et moi je possède les étoiles, puisque jamais
personne avant moi n’a songé à les posséder.
– Ça c’est vrai, dit le petit prince. Et qu’en fais-tu ?
– Je les gère. Je les compte et je les recompte, dit le businessman. C’est difficile. Mais je suis un homme sérieux !
Le petit prince n’était pas satisfait encore.
– Moi, si je possède un foulard, je puis le mettre autour de
mon cou et l’emporter. Moi, si je possède une fleur, je puis
cueillir ma fleur et l’emporter. Mais tu ne peux pas cueillir les
étoiles !
– Non, mais je puis les placer en banque.
– 56 –
– Qu’est-ce que ça veut dire ?
– Ça veut dire que j’écris sur un petit papier le nombre de
mes étoiles. Et puis j’enferme à clef ce papier-là dans un tiroir.
– Et c’est tout ?
– Ça suffit !
« C’est amusant, pensa le petit prince. C’est assez poétique.
Mais ce n’est pas très sérieux. »
Le petit prince avait sur les choses sérieuses des idées très
différentes des idées des grandes personnes.
– Moi, dit-il encore, je possède une fleur que j’arrose tous
les jours. Je possède trois volcans que je ramone toutes les semaines. Car je ramone aussi celui qui est éteint. On ne sait jamais. C’est utile à mes volcans, et c’est utile à ma fleur, que je les
possède. Mais tu n’es pas utile aux étoiles…
Le businessman ouvrit la bouche mais ne trouva rien à répondre, et le petit prince s’en fut.
« Les grandes personnes sont décidément tout à fait extraordinaires », se disait-il simplement en lui-même durant le
voyage.
– 57 –
CHAPITRE XIV
La cinquième planète était très curieuse. C’était la plus petite de toutes. Il y avait là juste assez de place pour loger un réverbère et un allumeur de réverbères. Le petit prince ne parvenait pas à s’expliquer à quoi pouvaient servir, quelque part dans
le ciel, sur une planète sans maison, ni population, un réverbère
et un allumeur de réverbères. Cependant il se dit en lui-même :
« Peut-être bien que cet homme est absurde. Cependant il
est moins absurde que le roi, que le vaniteux, que le businessman et que le buveur. Au moins son travail a-t-il un sens. 
– 58 –
Quand il allume son réverbère, c’est comme s’il faisait naître
une étoile de plus, ou une fleur. Quand il éteint son réverbère,
ça endort la fleur ou l’étoile. C’est une occupation très jolie.
C’est véritablement utile puisque c’est joli. »
Lorsqu’il aborda la planète il salua respectueusement
l’allumeur :
– Bonjour. Pourquoi viens-tu d’éteindre ton réverbère ?
– C’est la consigne, répondit l’allumeur. Bonjour.
– Qu’est-ce que la consigne ?
– C’est d’éteindre mon réverbère. Bonsoir.
Et il le ralluma.
– Mais pourquoi viens-tu de le rallumer ?
– C’est la consigne, répondit l’allumeur.
– Je ne comprends pas, dit le petit prince.
– Il n’y a rien à comprendre, dit l’allumeur. La consigne
c’est la consigne. Bonjour.
Et il éteignit son réverbère.
Puis il s’épongea le front avec un mouchoir à carreaux
rouges.
– Je fais là un métier terrible. C’était raisonnable autrefois.
J’éteignais le matin et j’allumais le soir. J’avais le reste du jour
pour me reposer, et le reste de la nuit pour dormir…
– 59 –
– Et, depuis cette époque, la consigne a changé ?
– La consigne n’a pas changé, dit l’allumeur. C’est bien là le
drame ! La planète d’année en année a tourné de plus en plus
vite, et la consigne n’a pas changé !
– Alors ? dit le petit prince.
– Alors maintenant qu’elle fait un tour par minute, je n’ai
plus une seconde de repos. J’allume et j’éteins une fois par minute !
– Ça c’est drôle ! Les jours chez toi durent une minute !
– Ce n’est pas drôle du tout, dit l’allumeur. Ça fait déjà un
mois que nous parlons ensemble.
– Un mois ?
– Oui. Trente minutes. Trente jours ! Bonsoir.
Et il ralluma son réverbère.
Le petit prince le regarda et il aima cet allumeur qui était
tellement fidèle à la consigne. Il se souvint des couchers de soleil que lui-même allait autrefois chercher, en tirant sa chaise. Il
voulut aider son ami :
– Tu sais… je connais un moyen de te reposer quand tu
voudras…
– Je veux toujours, dit l’allumeur.
Car on peut être, à la fois, fidèle et paresseux.
Le petit prince poursuivit :
– 60 –
– Ta planète est tellement petite que tu en fais le tour en
trois enjambées. Tu n’as qu’à marcher assez lentement pour
rester toujours au soleil. Quand tu voudras te reposer tu marcheras… et le jour durera aussi longtemps que tu voudras.
– Ça ne m’avance pas à grand’chose, dit l’allumeur. Ce que
j’aime dans la vie, c’est dormir.
– Ce n’est pas de chance, dit le petit prince.
– Ce n’est pas de chance, dit l’allumeur. Bonjour.
Et il éteignit son réverbère.
« Celui-là, se dit le petit prince, tandis qu’il poursuivait
plus loin son voyage, celui-là serait méprisé par tous les autres,
par le roi, par le vaniteux, par le buveur, par le businessman.
Cependant c’est le seul qui ne me paraisse pas ridicule. C’est,
peut-être, parce qu’il s’occupe d’autre chose que de soi-même. »
Il eut un soupir de regret et se dit encore :
« Celui-là est le seul dont j’eusse pu faire mon ami. Mais sa
planète est vraiment trop petite. Il n’y a pas de place pour
deux… »
Ce que le petit prince n’osait pas s’avouer, c’est qu’il regrettait cette planète bénie à cause, surtout, des mille quatre cent
quarante couchers de soleil par vingt-quatre heures !
– 61 –
CHAPITRE XV
La sixième planète était une planète dix fois plus vaste. Elle
était habitée par un vieux Monsieur qui écrivait d’énormes
livres.
– Tiens ! voilà un explorateur ! s’écria-t-il, quand il aperçut
le petit prince.
Le petit prince s’assit sur la table et souffla un peu. Il avait
déjà tant voyagé !
– D’où viens-tu ? lui dit le vieux Monsieur.
– Quel est ce gros livre ? dit le petit prince. Que faites-vous
ici ?
– 62 –
– Je suis géographe, dit le vieux Monsieur.
– Qu’est-ce qu’un géographe ?
– C’est un savant qui connaît où se trouvent les mers, les
fleuves, les villes, les montagnes et les déserts.
– Ça c’est bien intéressant, dit le petit prince. Ça c’est enfin
un véritable métier ! Et il jeta un coup d’œil autour de lui sur la
planète du géographe. Il n’avait jamais vu encore une planète
aussi majestueuse.
– Elle est bien belle, votre planète. Est-ce qu’il y a des
océans ?
– Je ne puis pas le savoir, dit le géographe.
– Ah ! (Le petit prince était déçu.) Et des montagnes ?
– Je ne puis pas le savoir, dit le géographe.
– Et des villes et des fleuves et des déserts ?
– Je ne puis pas le savoir non plus, dit le géographe.
– Mais vous êtes géographe !
– C’est exact, dit le géographe, mais je ne suis pas explorateur. Je manque absolument d’explorateurs. Ce n’est pas le géographe qui va faire le compte des villes, des fleuves, des montagnes, des mers, des océans et des déserts. Le géographe est
trop important pour flâner. Il ne quitte pas son bureau. Mais il y
reçoit les explorateurs. Il les interroge, et il prend en note leurs
souvenirs. Et si les souvenirs de l’un d’entre eux lui paraissent
intéressants, le géographe fait faire une enquête sur la moralité
de l’explorateur.
– 63 –
– Pourquoi ça ?
– Parce qu’un explorateur qui mentirait entraînerait des
catastrophes dans les livres de géographie. Et aussi un explorateur qui boirait trop.
– Pourquoi ça ? fit le petit prince.
– Parce que les ivrognes voient double. Alors le géographe
noterait deux montagnes, là où il n’y en a qu’une seule.
– Je connais quelqu’un, dit le petit prince, qui serait mauvais explorateur.
– C’est possible. Donc, quand la moralité de l’explorateur
paraît bonne, on fait une enquête sur sa découverte.
– On va voir ?
– Non. C’est trop compliqué. Mais on exige de l’explorateur
qu’il fournisse des preuves. S’il s’agit par exemple de la découverte d’une grosse montagne, on exige qu’il en rapporte de
grosses pierres.
Le géographe soudain s’émut.
– Mais toi, tu viens de loin ! Tu es explorateur ! Tu vas me
décrire ta planète !
Et le géographe, ayant ouvert son registre, tailla son
crayon. On note d’abord au crayon les récits des explorateurs.
On attend, pour noter à l’encre, que l’explorateur ait fourni des
preuves.
– Alors ? interrogea le géographe.
– 64 –
– Oh ! chez moi, dit le petit prince, ce n’est pas très intéressant, c’est tout petit. J’ai trois volcans. Deux volcans en activité,
et un volcan éteint. Mais on ne sait jamais.
– On ne sait jamais, dit le géographe.
– J’ai aussi une fleur.
– Nous ne notons pas les fleurs, dit le géographe.
– Pourquoi ça ! c’est le plus joli !
– Parce que les fleurs sont éphémères.
– Qu’est-ce que signifie : « éphémère » ?
– Les géographies, dit le géographe, sont les livres les plus
précieux de tous les livres. Elles ne se démodent jamais. Il est
très rare qu’une montagne change de place. Il est très rare qu’un
océan se vide de son eau. Nous écrivons des choses éternelles.
– Mais les volcans éteints peuvent se réveiller, interrompit
le petit prince. Qu’est-ce que signifie « éphémère » ?
– Que les volcans soient éteints ou soient éveillés, ça revient au même pour nous autres, dit le géographe. Ce qui
compte pour nous, c’est la montagne. Elle ne change pas.
– Mais qu’est-ce que signifie « éphémère » ? répéta le petit
prince qui, de sa vie, n’avait renoncé à une question, une fois
qu’il l’avait posée.
– Ça signifie « qui est menacé de disparition prochaine ».
– Ma fleur est menacée de disparition prochaine ?
– 65 –
– Bien sûr.
Ma fleur est éphémère, se dit le petit prince, et elle n’a que
quatre épines pour se défendre contre le monde ! Et je l’ai laissée toute seule chez moi !
Ce fut là son premier mouvement de regret. Mais il reprit
courage :
– Que me conseillez-vous d’aller visiter ? demanda-t-il.
– La planète Terre, lui répondit le géographe. Elle a une
bonne réputation…
Et le petit prince s’en fut, songeant à sa fleur.
– 66 –
CHAPITRE XVI
La septième planète fut donc la Terre.
La Terre n’est pas une planète quelconque ! On y compte
cent onze rois (en n’oubliant pas, bien sûr, les rois nègres), sept
mille géographes, neuf cent mille businessmen, sept millions et
demi d’ivrognes, trois cent onze millions de vaniteux, c’est-àdire environ deux milliards de grandes personnes.
Pour vous donner une idée des dimensions de la Terre je
vous dirai qu’avant l’invention de l’électricité on y devait entretenir, sur l’ensemble des six continents, une véritable armée de
quatre cent soixante-deux mille cinq cent onze allumeurs de
réverbères.
Vu d’un peu loin ça faisait un effet splendide. Les mouvements de cette armée étaient réglés comme ceux d’un ballet
d’opéra. D’abord venait le tour des allumeurs de réverbères de
Nouvelle-Zélande et d’Australie. Puis ceux-ci, ayant allumé
leurs lampions, s’en allaient dormir. Alors entraient à leur tour
dans la danse les allumeurs de réverbères de Chine et de Sibérie. Puis eux aussi s’escamotaient dans les coulisses. Alors venait le tour des allumeurs de réverbères de Russie et des Indes.
Puis de ceux d’Afrique et d’Europe. Puis de ceux d’Amérique du
Sud. Puis de ceux d’Amérique du Nord. Et jamais ils ne se
trompaient dans leur ordre d’entrée en scène. C’était grandiose.
Seuls, l’allumeur de l’unique réverbère du pôle Nord, et son
confrère de l’unique réverbère du pôle Sud, menaient des vies
d’oisiveté et de nonchalance : ils travaillaient deux fois par an.
– 67 –
CHAPITRE XVII
Quand on veut faire de l’esprit, il arrive que l’on mente un
peu. Je n’ai pas été très honnête en vous parlant des allumeurs
de réverbères. Je risque de donner une fausse idée de notre planète à ceux qui ne la connaissent pas. Les hommes occupent
très peu de place sur la terre. Si les deux milliards d’habitants
qui peuplent la terre se tenaient debout et un peu serrés, comme
pour un meeting, ils logeraient aisément sur une place publique
de vingt milles de long sur vingt milles de large. On pourrait
entasser l’humanité sur le moindre petit îlot du Pacifique.
Les grandes personnes, bien sûr, ne vous croiront pas.
Elles s’imaginent tenir beaucoup de place. Elles se voient importantes comme des baobabs. Vous leur conseillerez donc de faire
le calcul. Elles adorent les chiffres : ça leur plaira. Mais ne perdez pas votre temps à ce pensum. C’est inutile. Vous avez confiance en moi.
Le petit prince, une fois sur terre, fut donc bien surpris de
ne voir personne. Il avait déjà peur de s’être trompé de planète,
quand un anneau couleur de lune remua dans le sable.
– Bonne nuit, fit le petit prince à tout hasard.
– Bonne nuit, fit le serpent.
– Sur quelle planète suis-je tombé ? demanda le petit
prince.
– Sur la Terre, en Afrique, répondit le serpent.
– 68 –
– Ah !… Il n’y a donc personne sur la Terre ?
– Ici c’est le désert. Il n’y a personne dans les déserts. La
Terre est grande, dit le serpent.
Le petit prince s’assit sur une pierre et leva les yeux vers le
ciel :
– Je me demande, dit-il, si les étoiles sont éclairées afin
que chacun puisse un jour retrouver la sienne. Regarde ma planète. Elle est juste au-dessus de nous… Mais comme elle est
loin !
– Elle est belle, dit le serpent. Que viens-tu faire ici ?
– J’ai des difficultés avec une fleur, dit le petit prince.
– Ah ! fit le serpent.
Et ils se turent.
– 69 –
– Où sont les hommes ? reprit enfin le petit prince. On est
un peu seul dans le désert…
– On est seul aussi chez les hommes, dit le serpent.
Le petit prince le regarda longtemps :
– Tu es une drôle de bête, lui dit-il enfin, mince comme un
doigt…
– Mais je suis plus puissant que le doigt d’un roi, dit le serpent.
Le petit prince eut un sourire :
– Tu n’es pas bien puissant… tu n’as même pas de pattes…
tu ne peux même pas voyager…
– 70 –
– Je puis t’emporter plus loin qu’un navire, dit le serpent.
Il s’enroula autour de la cheville du petit prince, comme un
bracelet d’or :
– Celui que je touche, je le rends à la terre dont il est sorti,
dit-il encore. Mais tu es pur et tu viens d’une étoile…
Le petit prince ne répondit rien.
– Tu me fais pitié, toi si faible, sur cette Terre de granit. Je
puis t’aider un jour si tu regrettes trop ta planète. Je puis…
– Oh ! J’ai très bien compris, fit le petit prince, mais pourquoi parles-tu toujours par énigmes ?
– Je les résous toutes, dit le serpent.
Et ils se turent.
– 71 –
CHAPITRE XVIII
Le petit prince traversa le désert et ne rencontra qu’une
fleur. Une fleur à trois pétales, une fleur de rien du tout…
– Bonjour, dit le petit prince.
– Bonjour, dit la fleur.
– Où sont les hommes ? demanda poliment le petit prince.
La fleur, un jour, avait vu passer une caravane :
– 72 –
– Les hommes ? Il en existe, je crois, six ou sept. Je les ai
aperçus il y a des années. Mais on ne sait jamais où les trouver.
Le vent les promène. Ils manquent de racines, ça les gêne beaucoup.
– Adieu, fit le petit prince.
– Adieu, dit la fleur.
– 73 –
CHAPITRE XIX
Le petit prince fit l’ascension d’une haute montagne. Les
seules montagnes qu’il eût jamais connues étaient les trois volcans qui lui arrivaient au genou. Et il se servait du volcan éteint
comme d’un tabouret. « D’une montagne haute comme celle-ci,
se dit-il donc, j’apercevrai d’un coup toute la planète et tous les
hommes… » Mais il n’aperçut rien que des aiguilles de roc bien
aiguisées.
– 74 –
– Bonjour, dit-il à tout hasard.
– Bonjour… Bonjour… Bonjour… répondit l’écho.
– Qui êtes-vous ? dit le petit prince.
– Qui êtes-vous… qui êtes-vous… qui êtes-vous… répondit
l’écho.
– Soyez mes amis, je suis seul, dit-il.
– Je suis seul… je suis seul… je suis seul… répondit l’écho.
« Quelle drôle de planète ! pensa-t-il alors. Elle est toute
sèche, et toute pointue et toute salée. Et les hommes manquent
d’imagination. Ils répètent ce qu’on leur dit… Chez moi j’avais
une fleur : elle parlait toujours la première… »
– 75 –
CHAPITRE XX
Mais il arriva que le petit prince, ayant longtemps marché à
travers les sables, les rocs et les neiges, découvrit enfin une
route. Et les routes vont toutes chez les hommes.
– Bonjour, dit-il.
C’était un jardin fleuri de roses.
– Bonjour, dirent les roses.
Le petit prince les regarda. Elles ressemblaient toutes à sa
fleur.
– Qui êtes-vous ? leur demanda-t-il, stupéfait.
– Nous sommes des roses, dirent les roses.
– Ah ! fit le petit prince…
– 76 –
Et il se sentit très malheureux. Sa fleur lui avait raconté
qu’elle était seule de son espèce dans l’univers. Et voici qu’il en
était cinq mille, toutes semblables, dans un seul jardin !
« Elle serait bien vexée, se dit-il, si elle voyait ça… elle tousserait énormément et ferait semblant de mourir pour échapper
au ridicule. Et je serais bien obligé de faire semblant de la soigner, car, sinon, pour m’humilier moi aussi, elle se laisserait
vraiment mourir… »
Puis il se dit encore : « Je me croyais riche d’une fleur
unique, et je ne possède qu’une rose ordinaire. Ça et mes trois
volcans qui m’arrivent au genou, et dont l’un, peut-être, est
éteint pour toujours, ça ne fait pas de moi un bien grand
prince… » Et, couché dans l’herbe, il pleura.
– 77 –
CHAPITRE XXI
C’est alors qu’apparut le renard.
– Bonjour, dit le renard.
– Bonjour, répondit poliment le petit prince, qui se retourna mais ne vit rien.
– Je suis là, dit la voix, sous le pommier.
– Qui es-tu ? dit le petit prince. Tu es bien joli…
– Je suis un renard, dit le renard.
– Viens jouer avec moi, lui proposa le petit prince. Je suis
tellement triste…
– 78 –
– Je ne puis pas jouer avec toi, dit le renard. Je ne suis pas
apprivoisé.
– Ah ! pardon, fit le petit prince.
Mais, après réflexion, il ajouta :
– Qu’est-ce que signifie « apprivoiser » ?
– Tu n’es pas d’ici, dit le renard, que cherches-tu ?
– Je cherche les hommes, dit le petit prince. Qu’est-ce que
signifie « apprivoiser » ?
– Les hommes, dit le renard, ils ont des fusils et ils chassent. C’est bien gênant ! Ils élèvent aussi des poules. C’est leur
seul intérêt. Tu cherches des poules ?
– Non, dit le petit prince. Je cherche des amis. Qu’est-ce
que signifie « apprivoiser » ?
– C’est une chose trop oubliée, dit le renard. Ça signifie
« créer des liens… »
– Créer des liens ?
– Bien sûr, dit le renard. Tu n’es encore pour moi qu’un petit garçon tout semblable à cent mille petits garçons. Et je n’ai
pas besoin de toi. Et tu n’as pas besoin de moi non plus. Je ne
suis pour toi qu’un renard semblable à cent mille renards. Mais,
si tu m’apprivoises, nous aurons besoin l’un de l’autre. Tu seras
pour moi unique au monde. Je serai pour toi unique au
monde…
– 79 –
– Je commence à comprendre, dit le petit prince. Il y a une
fleur… je crois qu’elle m’a apprivoisé…
– C’est possible, dit le renard. On voit sur la Terre toutes
sortes de choses…
– Oh ! ce n’est pas sur la Terre, dit le petit prince.
Le renard parut très intrigué :
– Sur une autre planète ?
– Oui.
– Il y a des chasseurs, sur cette planète-là ?
– Non.
– Ça, c’est intéressant ! Et des poules ?
– Non.
– Rien n’est parfait, soupira le renard.
– 80 –
Mais le renard revint à son idée :
– Ma vie est monotone. Je chasse les poules, les hommes
me chassent. Toutes les poules se ressemblent, et tous les
hommes se ressemblent. Je m’ennuie donc un peu. Mais, si tu
m’apprivoises, ma vie sera comme ensoleillée. Je connaîtrai un
bruit de pas qui sera différent de tous les autres. Les autres pas
me font rentrer sous terre. Le tien m’appellera hors du terrier,
comme une musique. Et puis regarde ! Tu vois, là-bas, les
champs de blé ? Je ne mange pas de pain. Le blé pour moi est
inutile. Les champs de blé ne me rappellent rien. Et ça, c’est
triste ! Mais tu as des cheveux couleur d’or. Alors ce sera merveilleux quand tu m’auras apprivoisé ! Le blé, qui est doré, me
fera souvenir de toi. Et j’aimerai le bruit du vent dans le blé…
Le renard se tut et regarda longtemps le petit prince :
– S’il te plaît… apprivoise-moi ! dit-il.
– Je veux bien, répondit le petit prince, mais je n’ai pas
beaucoup de temps. J’ai des amis à découvrir et beaucoup de
choses à connaître.
– On ne connaît que les choses que l’on apprivoise, dit le
renard. Les hommes n’ont plus le temps de rien connaître. Ils
achètent des choses toutes faites chez les marchands. Mais
comme il n’existe point de marchands d’amis, les hommes n’ont
plus d’amis. Si tu veux un ami, apprivoise-moi !
– Que faut-il faire ? dit le petit prince.
– Il faut être très patient, répondit le renard. Tu t’assoiras
d’abord un peu loin de moi, comme ça, dans l’herbe. Je te regarderai du coin de l’œil et tu ne diras rien. Le langage est
source de malentendus. Mais, chaque jour, tu pourras t’asseoir
un peu plus près…
– 81 –
Le lendemain revint le petit prince.
– Il eût mieux valu revenir à la même heure, dit le renard.
Si tu viens, par exemple, à quatre heures de l’après-midi, dès
trois heures je commencerai d’être heureux. Plus l’heure avancera, plus je me sentirai heureux. À quatre heures, déjà, je
m’agiterai et m’inquiéterai ; je découvrirai le prix du bonheur !
Mais si tu viens n’importe quand, je ne saurai jamais à quelle
heure m’habiller le cœur… Il faut des rites.
– Qu’est-ce qu’un rite ? dit le petit prince.
– C’est aussi quelque chose de trop oublié, dit le renard.
C’est ce qui fait qu’un jour est différent des autres jours, une
heure, des autres heures. Il y a un rite, par exemple, chez mes
chasseurs. Ils dansent le jeudi avec les filles du village. Alors le 
– 82 –
jeudi est jour merveilleux ! Je vais me promener jusqu’à la
vigne. Si les chasseurs dansaient n’importe quand, les jours se
ressembleraient tous, et je n’aurais point de vacances.
Ainsi le petit prince apprivoisa le renard. Et quand l’heure
du départ fut proche :
– Ah ! dit le renard… Je pleurerai.
– C’est ta faute, dit le petit prince, je ne te souhaitais point
de mal, mais tu as voulu que je t’apprivoise…
– Bien sûr, dit le renard.
– Mais tu vas pleurer ! dit le petit prince.
– Bien sûr, dit le renard.
– Alors tu n’y gagnes rien !
– J’y gagne, dit le renard, à cause de la couleur du blé.
Puis il ajouta :
– Va revoir les roses. Tu comprendras que la tienne est
unique au monde. Tu reviendras me dire adieu, et je te ferai cadeau d’un secret.
Le petit prince s’en fut revoir les roses.
– Vous n’êtes pas du tout semblables à ma rose, vous n’êtes
rien encore, leur dit-il. Personne ne vous a apprivoisées et vous
n’avez apprivoisé personne. Vous êtes comme était mon renard.
Ce n’était qu’un renard semblable à cent mille autres. Mais j’en
ai fait mon ami, et il est maintenant unique au monde.
– 83 –
Et les roses étaient bien gênées.
– Vous êtes belles, mais vous êtes vides, leur dit-il encore.
On ne peut pas mourir pour vous. Bien sûr, ma rose à moi, un
passant ordinaire croirait qu’elle vous ressemble. Mais à elle
seule elle est plus importante que vous toutes, puisque c’est elle
que j’ai arrosée. Puisque c’est elle que j’ai mise sous globe.
Puisque c’est elle que j’ai abritée par le paravent. Puisque c’est
elle dont j’ai tué les chenilles (sauf les deux ou trois pour les papillons). Puisque c’est elle que j’ai écoutée se plaindre, ou se
vanter, ou même quelquefois se taire. Puisque c’est ma rose.
Et il revint vers le renard :
– Adieu, dit-il…
– Adieu, dit le renard. Voici mon secret. Il est très simple :
on ne voit bien qu’avec le cœur. L’essentiel est invisible pour les
yeux.
– L’essentiel est invisible pour les yeux, répéta le petit
prince, afin de se souvenir.
– C’est le temps que tu as perdu pour ta rose qui fait ta rose
si importante.
– C’est le temps que j’ai perdu pour ma rose… fit le petit
prince, afin de se souvenir.
– Les hommes ont oublié cette vérité, dit le renard. Mais tu
ne dois pas l’oublier. Tu deviens responsable pour toujours de
ce que tu as apprivoisé. Tu es responsable de ta rose…
– Je suis responsable de ma rose… répéta le petit prince,
afin de se souvenir.
– 84 –
CHAPITRE XXII
– Bonjour, dit le petit prince.
– Bonjour, dit l’aiguilleur.
– Que fais-tu ici ? dit le petit prince.
– Je trie les voyageurs, par paquets de mille, dit
l’aiguilleur. J’expédie les trains qui les emportent, tantôt vers la
droite, tantôt vers la gauche.
Et un rapide illuminé, grondant comme le tonnerre, fit
trembler la cabine d’aiguillage.
– Ils sont bien pressés, dit le petit prince. Que cherchentils ?
– L’homme de la locomotive l’ignore lui-même, dit
l’aiguilleur.
Et gronda, en sens inverse, un second rapide illuminé.
– Ils reviennent déjà ? demanda le petit prince…
– Ce ne sont pas les mêmes, dit l’aiguilleur. C’est un
échange.
– Ils n’étaient pas contents, là où ils étaient ?
– On n’est jamais content là où l’on est, dit l’aiguilleur.
– 85 –
Et gronda le tonnerre d’un troisième rapide illuminé.
– Ils poursuivent les premiers voyageurs ? demanda le petit prince.
– Ils ne poursuivent rien du tout, dit l’aiguilleur. Ils dorment là-dedans, ou bien ils bâillent. Les enfants seuls écrasent
leur nez contre les vitres.
– Les enfants seuls savent ce qu’ils cherchent, fit le petit
prince. Ils perdent du temps pour une poupée de chiffons, et
elle devient très importante, et si on la leur enlève, ils pleurent…
– Ils ont de la chance, dit l’aiguilleur.
– 86 –
CHAPITRE XXIII
– Bonjour, dit le petit prince.
– Bonjour, dit le marchand.
C’était un marchand de pilules perfectionnées qui apaisent
la soif. On en avale une par semaine et l’on n’éprouve plus le
besoin de boire.
– Pourquoi vends-tu ça ? dit le petit prince.
– C’est une grosse économie de temps, dit le marchand. Les
experts ont fait des calculs. On épargne cinquante-trois minutes
par semaine.
– Et que fait-on de ces cinquante-trois minutes ?
– On en fait ce que l’on veut…
« Moi, se dit le petit prince, si j’avais cinquante-trois minutes à dépenser, je marcherais tout doucement vers une fontaine… »
– 87 –
CHAPITRE XXIV
Nous en étions au huitième jour de ma panne dans le désert, et j’avais écouté l’histoire du marchand en buvant la dernière goutte de ma provision d’eau :
– Ah ! dis-je au petit prince, ils sont bien jolis, tes souvenirs, mais je n’ai pas encore réparé mon avion, je n’ai plus rien à
boire, et je serais heureux, moi aussi, si je pouvais marcher tout
doucement vers une fontaine !
– Mon ami le renard, me dit-il…
– Mon petit bonhomme, il ne s’agit plus du renard !
– Pourquoi ?
– Parce qu’on va mourir de soif…
Il ne comprit pas mon raisonnement, il me répondit :
– C’est bien d’avoir eu un ami, même si l’on va mourir.
Moi, je suis bien content d’avoir eu un ami renard…
« Il ne mesure pas le danger, me dis-je. Il n’a jamais ni
faim ni soif. Un peu de soleil lui suffit… »
Mais il me regarda et répondit à ma pensée :
– J’ai soif aussi… cherchons un puits…
– 88 –
J’eus un geste de lassitude : il est absurde de chercher un
puits, au hasard, dans l’immensité du désert. Cependant nous
nous mîmes en marche.
Quand nous eûmes marché, des heures, en silence, la nuit
tomba, et les étoiles commencèrent de s’éclairer. Je les apercevais comme en rêve, ayant un peu de fièvre, à cause de ma soif.
Les mots du petit prince dansaient dans ma mémoire :
– Tu as donc soif, toi aussi ? lui demandai-je.
Mais il ne répondit pas à ma question. Il me dit simplement :
– L’eau peut aussi être bonne pour le cœur…
Je ne compris pas sa réponse mais je me tus… Je savais
bien qu’il ne fallait pas l’interroger.
Il était fatigué. Il s’assit. Je m’assis auprès de lui. Et, après
un silence, il dit encore :
– Les étoiles sont belles, à cause d’une fleur que l’on ne voit
pas…
Je répondis « bien sûr » et je regardai, sans parler, les plis
du sable sous la lune.
– Le désert est beau, ajouta-t-il…
Et c’était vrai. J’ai toujours aimé le désert. On s’assoit sur
une dune de sable. On ne voit rien. On n’entend rien. Et cependant quelque chose rayonne en silence…
– Ce qui embellit le désert, dit le petit prince, c’est qu’il
cache un puits quelque part…
– 89 –
Je fus surpris de comprendre soudain ce mystérieux
rayonnement du sable. Lorsque j’étais petit garçon j’habitais
une maison ancienne, et la légende racontait qu’un trésor y était
enfoui. Bien sûr, jamais personne n’a su le découvrir, ni peutêtre même ne l’a cherché. Mais il enchantait toute cette maison.
Ma maison cachait un secret au fond de son cœur…
– Oui, dis-je au petit prince, qu’il s’agisse de la maison, des
étoiles ou du désert, ce qui fait leur beauté est invisible !
– Je suis content, dit-il, que tu sois d’accord avec mon renard.
Comme le petit prince s’endormait, je le pris dans mes
bras, et me remis en route. J’étais ému. Il me semblait porter un
trésor fragile. Il me semblait même qu’il n’y eût rien de plus fragile sur la Terre. Je regardais, à la lumière de la lune, ce front
pâle, ces yeux clos, ces mèches de cheveux qui tremblaient au
vent, et je me disais : « Ce que je vois là n’est qu’une écorce. Le
plus important est invisible… »
Comme ses lèvres entr’ouvertes ébauchaient un demisourire je me dis encore : « Ce qui m’émeut si fort de ce petit
prince endormi, c’est sa fidélité pour une fleur, c’est l’image
d’une rose qui rayonne en lui comme la flamme d’une lampe,
même quand il dort… » Et je le devinai plus fragile encore. Il
faut bien protéger les lampes : un coup de vent peut les
éteindre…
Et, marchant ainsi, je découvris le puits au lever du jour.
– 90 –
CHAPITRE XXV
– Les hommes, dit le petit prince, ils s’enfournent dans les
rapides, mais ils ne savent plus ce qu’ils cherchent. Alors ils
s’agitent et tournent en rond…
Et il ajouta :
– Ce n’est pas la peine…
Le puits que nous avions atteint ne ressemblait pas aux
puits sahariens. Les puits sahariens sont de simples trous creusés dans le sable. Celui-là ressemblait à un puits de village. Mais
il n’y avait là aucun village, et je croyais rêver.
– C’est étrange, dis-je au petit prince, tout est prêt : la poulie, le seau et la corde…
Il rit, toucha la corde, fit jouer la poulie. Et la poulie gémit
comme gémit une vieille girouette quand le vent a longtemps
dormi.
– Tu entends, dit le petit prince, nous réveillons ce puits et
il chante…
Je ne voulais pas qu’il fît un effort :
– Laisse-moi faire, lui dis-je, c’est trop lourd pour toi.
– 91 –
Lentement je hissai le seau jusqu’à la margelle. Je l’y installai bien d’aplomb. Dans mes oreilles durait le chant de la poulie
et, dans l’eau qui tremblait encore, je voyais trembler le soleil.
– J’ai soif de cette eau-là, dit le petit prince, donne-moi à
boire…
Et je compris ce qu’il avait cherché !
Je soulevai le seau jusqu’à ses lèvres. Il but, les yeux fermés. C’était doux comme une fête. Cette eau était bien autre 
– 92 –
chose qu’un aliment. Elle était née de la marche sous les étoiles,
du chant de la poulie, de l’effort de mes bras. Elle était bonne
pour le cœur, comme un cadeau. Lorsque j’étais petit garçon, la
lumière de l’arbre de Noël, la musique de la messe de minuit, la
douceur des sourires faisaient ainsi tout le rayonnement du cadeau de Noël que je recevais.
– Les hommes de chez toi, dit le petit prince, cultivent cinq
mille roses dans un même jardin… et ils n’y trouvent pas ce
qu’ils cherchent…
– Ils ne le trouvent pas, répondis-je…
– Et cependant ce qu’ils cherchent pourrait être trouvé
dans une seule rose ou un peu d’eau…
– Bien sûr, répondis-je.
Et le petit prince ajouta :
– Mais les yeux sont aveugles. Il faut chercher avec le cœur.
J’avais bu. Je respirais bien. Le sable, au lever du jour, est
couleur de miel. J’étais heureux aussi de cette couleur de miel.
Pourquoi fallait-il que j’eusse de la peine…
– Il faut que tu tiennes ta promesse, me dit doucement le
petit prince, qui, de nouveau, s’était assis auprès de moi.
– Quelle promesse ?
– Tu sais… une muselière pour mon mouton… je suis responsable de cette fleur !
Je sortis de ma poche mes ébauches de dessin. Le petit
prince les aperçut et dit en riant :
– 93 –
– Tes baobabs, ils ressemblent un peu à des choux…
– Oh !
Moi qui étais si fier des baobabs !
– Ton renard… ses oreilles… elles ressemblent un peu à des
cornes… et elles sont trop longues !
Et il rit encore.
– Tu es injuste, petit bonhomme, je ne savais rien dessiner
que les boas fermés et les boas ouverts.
– Oh ! ça ira, dit-il, les enfants savent.
Je crayonnai donc une muselière. Et j’eus le cœur serré en
la lui donnant :
– Tu as des projets que j’ignore…
Mais il ne me répondit pas. Il me dit :
– Tu sais, ma chute sur la Terre… c’en sera demain
l’anniversaire…
Puis, après un silence il dit encore :
– J’étais tombé tout près d’ici…
Et il rougit.
Et de nouveau, sans comprendre pourquoi, j’éprouvai un
chagrin bizarre. Cependant une question me vint :
– 94 –
– Alors ce n’est pas par hasard que, le matin où je t’ai connu, il y a huit jours, tu te promenais comme ça, tout seul, à mille
milles de toutes les régions habitées ! Tu retournais vers le point
de ta chute ?
Le petit prince rougit encore.
Et j’ajoutai, en hésitant :
– À cause, peut-être, de l’anniversaire ?…
Le petit prince rougit de nouveau. Il ne répondait jamais
aux questions, mais, quand on rougit, ça signifie « oui », n’estce pas ?
– Ah ! lui dis-je, j’ai peur…
Mais il me répondit :
– Tu dois maintenant travailler. Tu dois repartir vers ta
machine. Je t’attends ici. Reviens demain soir…
Mais je n’étais pas rassuré. Je me souvenais du renard. On
risque de pleurer un peu si l’on s’est laissé apprivoiser…
– 95 –
CHAPITRE XXVI
Il y avait, à côté du puits, une ruine de vieux mur de pierre.
Lorsque je revins de mon travail, le lendemain soir, j’aperçus de
loin mon petit prince assis là-haut, les jambes pendantes. Et je
l’entendis qui parlait :
– Tu ne t’en souviens donc pas ? disait-il. Ce n’est pas tout
à fait ici !
Une autre voix lui répondit sans doute, puisqu’il répliqua :
– Si ! Si ! c’est bien le jour, mais ce n’est pas ici l’endroit…
Je poursuivis ma marche vers le mur. Je ne voyais ni
n’entendais toujours personne. Pourtant le petit prince répliqua
de nouveau :
– … Bien sûr. Tu verras où commence ma trace dans le
sable. Tu n’as qu’à m’y attendre. J’y serai cette nuit.
J’étais à vingt mètres du mur et je ne voyais toujours rien.
Le petit prince dit encore, après un silence :
– Tu as du bon venin ? Tu es sûr de ne pas me faire souffrir
longtemps ?
Je fis halte, le cœur serré, mais je ne comprenais toujours
pas.
– 96 –
– Maintenant va-t’en, dit-il… je veux redescendre !
Alors j’abaissai moi-même les yeux vers le pied du mur, et
je fis un bond ! Il était là, dressé vers le petit prince, un de ces
serpents jaunes qui vous exécutent en trente secondes. Tout en
fouillant ma poche pour en tirer mon revolver, je pris le pas de
course, mais, au bruit que je fis, le serpent se laissa doucement
couler dans le sable, comme un jet d’eau qui meurt, et, sans trop
se presser, se faufila entre les pierres avec un léger bruit de métal.
Je parvins au mur juste à temps pour y recevoir dans les
bras mon petit bonhomme de prince, pâle comme la neige.
– 97 –
– Quelle est cette histoire-là ! Tu parles maintenant avec
les serpents !
J’avais défait son éternel cache-nez d’or. Je lui avais mouillé les tempes et l’avais fait boire. Et maintenant je n’osais plus
rien lui demander. Il me regarda gravement et m’entoura le cou
de ses bras. Je sentais battre son cœur comme celui d’un oiseau
qui meurt, quand on l’a tiré à la carabine. Il me dit :
– Je suis content que tu aies trouvé ce qui manquait à ta
machine. Tu vas pouvoir rentrer chez toi…
– Comment sais-tu !
Je venais justement lui annoncer que, contre toute espérance, j’avais réussi mon travail !
Il ne répondit rien à ma question, mais il ajouta :
– Moi aussi, aujourd’hui, je rentre chez moi…
Puis, mélancolique :
– C’est bien plus loin… c’est bien plus difficile…
Je sentais bien qu’il se passait quelque chose
d’extraordinaire. Je le serrais dans les bras comme un petit enfant, et cependant il me semblait qu’il coulait verticalement
dans un abîme sans que je pusse rien pour le retenir…
Il avait le regard sérieux, perdu très loin :
– J’ai ton mouton. Et j’ai la caisse pour le mouton. Et j’ai la
muselière…
Et il sourit avec mélancolie.
– 98 –
J’attendis longtemps. Je sentais qu’il se réchauffait peu à
peu :
– Petit bonhomme, tu as eu peur…
Il avait eu peur, bien sûr ! Mais il rit doucement :
– J’aurai bien plus peur ce soir…
De nouveau je me sentis glacé par le sentiment de
l’irréparable. Et je compris que je ne supportais pas l’idée de ne
plus jamais entendre ce rire. C’était pour moi comme une fontaine dans le désert.
– Petit bonhomme, je veux encore t’entendre rire…
Mais il me dit :
– Cette nuit, ça fera un an. Mon étoile se trouvera juste audessus de l’endroit où je suis tombé l’année dernière…
– Petit bonhomme, n’est-ce pas que c’est un mauvais rêve
cette histoire de serpent et de rendez-vous et d’étoile…
Mais il ne répondit pas à ma question. Il me dit :
– Ce qui est important, ça ne se voit pas…
– Bien sûr…
– C’est comme pour la fleur. Si tu aimes une fleur qui se
trouve dans une étoile, c’est doux, la nuit, de regarder le ciel.
Toutes les étoiles sont fleuries.
– Bien sûr…
– 99 –
– C’est comme pour l’eau. Celle que tu m’as donnée à boire
était comme une musique, à cause de la poulie et de la corde…
tu te rappelles… elle était bonne.
– Bien sûr…
– Tu regarderas, la nuit, les étoiles. C’est trop petit chez
moi pour que je te montre où se trouve la mienne. C’est mieux
comme ça. Mon étoile, ça sera pour toi une des étoiles. Alors,
toutes les étoiles, tu aimeras les regarder… Elles seront toutes
tes amies. Et puis je vais te faire un cadeau…
Il rit encore.
– Ah ! petit bonhomme, petit bonhomme j’aime entendre
ce rire !
– Justement ce sera mon cadeau… ce sera comme pour
l’eau…
– Que veux-tu dire ?
– Les gens ont des étoiles qui ne sont pas les mêmes. Pour
les uns, qui voyagent, les étoiles sont des guides. Pour d’autres
elles ne sont rien que de petites lumières. Pour d’autres, qui
sont savants, elles sont des problèmes. Pour mon businessman
elles étaient de l’or. Mais toutes ces étoiles-là se taisent. Toi, tu
auras des étoiles comme personne n’en a…
– Que veux-tu dire ?
– Quand tu regarderas le ciel, la nuit, puisque j’habiterai
dans l’une d’elles, puisque je rirai dans l’une d’elles, alors ce sera pour toi comme si riaient toutes les étoiles. Tu auras, toi, des
étoiles qui savent rire !
– 100 –
Et il rit encore.
– Et quand tu seras consolé (on se console toujours) tu seras content de m’avoir connu. Tu seras toujours mon ami. Tu
auras envie de rire avec moi. Et tu ouvriras parfois ta fenêtre,
comme ça, pour le plaisir… Et tes amis seront bien étonnés de te
voir rire en regardant le ciel. Alors tu leur diras : « Oui, les
étoiles, ça me fait toujours rire ! » Et ils te croiront fou. Je
t’aurai joué un bien vilain tour…
Et il rit encore.
– Ce sera comme si je t’avais donné, au lieu d’étoiles, des
tas de petits grelots qui savent rire…
Et il rit encore. Puis il redevint sérieux :
– Cette nuit… tu sais… ne viens pas.
– Je ne te quitterai pas.
– J’aurai l’air d’avoir mal… j’aurai un peu l’air de mourir.
C’est comme ça. Ne viens pas voir ça, ce n’est pas la peine…
– Je ne te quitterai pas.
Mais il était soucieux.
– Je te dis ça… c’est à cause aussi du serpent. Il ne faut pas
qu’il te morde… Les serpents, c’est méchant. Ça peut mordre
pour le plaisir…
– Je ne te quitterai pas.
Mais quelque chose le rassura :
– 101 –
– C’est vrai qu’ils n’ont plus de venin pour la seconde morsure…
Cette nuit-là je ne le vis pas se mettre en route. Il s’était
évadé sans bruit. Quand je réussis à le rejoindre il marchait décidé, d’un pas rapide. Il me dit seulement :
– Ah ! tu es là…
Et il me prit par la main. Mais il se tourmenta encore :
– Tu as eu tort. Tu auras de la peine. J’aurai l’air d’être
mort et ce ne sera pas vrai…
Moi je me taisais.
– Tu comprends. C’est trop loin. Je ne peux pas emporter
ce corps-là. C’est trop lourd.
Moi je me taisais.
– 102 –
– Mais ce sera comme une vieille écorce abandonnée. Ce
n’est pas triste les vieilles écorces…
Moi je me taisais.
Il se découragea un peu. Mais il fit encore un effort :
– Ce sera gentil, tu sais. Moi aussi je regarderai les étoiles.
Toutes les étoiles seront des puits avec une poulie rouillée.
Toutes les étoiles me verseront à boire…
Moi je me taisais.
– Ce sera tellement amusant ! Tu auras cinq cents millions
de grelots, j’aurai cinq cents millions de fontaines…
Et il se tut aussi, parce qu’il pleurait…
– C’est là. Laisse-moi faire un pas tout seul.
Et il s’assit parce qu’il avait peur.
Il dit encore :
– 103 –
– Tu sais… ma fleur… j’en suis responsable ! Et elle est tellement faible ! Et elle est tellement naïve. Elle a quatre épines
de rien du tout pour la protéger contre le monde…
Moi je m’assis parce que je ne pouvais plus me tenir debout. Il dit :
– Voilà… C’est tout…
Il hésita encore un peu, puis il se releva. Il fit un pas. Moi je
ne pouvais pas bouger.
Il n’y eut rien qu’un éclair jaune près de sa cheville. Il demeura un instant immobile. Il ne cria pas. Il tomba doucement
comme tombe un arbre. Ça ne fit même pas de bruit, à cause du
sable.
– 104 –
CHAPITRE XXVII
Et maintenant, bien sûr, ça fait six ans déjà… Je n’ai jamais
encore raconté cette histoire. Les camarades qui m’ont revu ont
été bien contents de me revoir vivant. J’étais triste mais je leur
disais : « C’est la fatigue… »
Maintenant je me suis un peu consolé. C’est-à-dire… pas
tout à fait. Mais je sais bien qu’il est revenu à sa planète, car, au
lever du jour, je n’ai pas retrouvé son corps. Ce n’était pas un
corps tellement lourd… Et j’aime la nuit écouter les étoiles. C’est
comme cinq cent millions de grelots…
Mais voilà qu’il se passe quelque chose d’extraordinaire. La
muselière que j’ai dessinée pour le petit prince, j’ai oublié d’y
ajouter la courroie de cuir ! Il n’aura jamais pu l’attacher au
mouton. Alors je me demande : « Que s’est-il passé sur sa planète ? Peut-être bien que le mouton a mangé la fleur… »
Tantôt je me dis : « Sûrement non ! Le petit prince enferme
sa fleur toutes les nuits sous son globe de verre, et il surveille
bien son mouton… » Alors je suis heureux. Et toutes les étoiles
rient doucement.
Tantôt je me dis : « On est distrait une fois ou l’autre, et ça
suffit ! Il a oublié, un soir, le globe de verre, ou bien le mouton
est sorti sans bruit pendant la nuit… » Alors les grelots se changent tous en larmes !…
C’est là un bien grand mystère. Pour vous qui aimez aussi
le petit prince, comme pour moi, rien de l’univers n’est sem-
– 105 –
blable si quelque part, on ne sait où, un mouton que nous ne
connaissons pas a, oui ou non, mangé une rose…
Regardez le ciel. Demandez-vous : le mouton oui ou non at-il mangé la fleur ? Et vous verrez comme tout change…
Et aucune grande personne ne comprendra jamais que ça a
tellement d’importance !
Ça c’est, pour moi, le plus beau et le plus triste paysage du
monde. C’est le même paysage que celui de la page précédente,
mais je l’ai dessiné une fois encore pour bien vous le montrer.
C’est ici que le petit prince a apparu sur terre, puis disparu.
Regardez attentivement ce paysage afin d’être sûrs de le reconnaître, si vous voyagez un jour en Afrique, dans le désert. Et,
s’il vous arrive de passer par là, je vous en supplie, ne vous pressez pas, attendez un peu juste sous l’étoile ! Si alors un enfant
vient à vous, s’il rit, s’il a des cheveux d’or, s’il ne répond pas
quand on l’interroge, vous devinerez bien qui il est. Alors soyez
gentils ! Ne me laissez pas tellement triste : écrivez-moi vite
qu’il est revenu…
– 106
–
À propos de cette édition électronique
Texte libre de droits.
Corrections, édition, conversion informatique et publication par
le groupe :
Ebooks libres et gratuits
http://fr.groups.yahoo.com/group/ebooksgratuits
Adresse du site web du groupe :
http://www.ebooksgratuits.com/
—
Novembre 2008
—
– Élaboration de ce livre électronique :
Les membres de Ebooks libres et gratuits qui ont participé à
l’élaboration de ce livre, sont : PatriceC, Coolmicro et Fred
– Dispositions :
Les livres que nous mettons à votre disposition, sont des textes
libres de droits, que vous pouvez utiliser librement, à une fin non
commerciale et non professionnelle. Tout lien vers notre site
est bienvenu…
– Qualité :
Les textes sont livrés tels quels sans garantie de leur intégrité parfaite par rapport à l'original. Nous rappelons que c'est un travail
d'amateurs non rétribués et que nous essayons de promouvoir la
culture littéraire avec de maigres moyens.
Votre aide est la bienvenue !
VOUS POUVEZ NOUS AIDER À FAIRE CONNAÎTRE CES
CLASSIQUES LITTÉRAIRES.




Der kleine Prinz
Kategorie Malý princ
11. Březen 2008
FÜR LÉON WERTH
Ich bitte die Kinder um Verzeihung, daß ich dieses Buch einem Erwachsenen widme. Ich habe eine ernstliche Entschuldigung dafür: Dieser Erwachsene ist der beste Freund, den ich in der Welt habe. Ich habe noch eine Entschuldigung: Dieser Erwachsene kann alles verstehen, sogar die Bücher für Kinder. Ich habe eine dritte Entschuldigung: Dieser Erwachsene wohnt in Frankreich, wo er hungert und friert. Er braucht sehr notwendig einen Trost. Wenn alle diese Entschuldigungen nicht ausreichen, so will ich dieses Buch dem Kinde widmen, das dieser Erwachsene einst war. Alle großen Leute sind einmal Kinder gewesen (aber wenige erinnern sich daran). Ich verbessere also meine Widmung:
FÜR LÉON WERTH als er noch ein Junge war
I
Als ich sechs Jahre alt war, sah ich einmal in einem Buch über den Urwald, das »Erlebte Geschichten« hieß, ein prächtiges Bild. Es stellte eine Riesenschlange dar, wie sie ein Wildtier verschlang. Hier ist eine Kopie der Zeichnung.
Der kleine Prinz
In dem Buche hieß es: »Die Boas verschlingen ihre Beute als Ganzes, ohne sie zu zerbeißen. Daraufhin können sie sich nicht mehr rühren und schlafen sechs Monate, um zu verdauen.«
Ich habe damals viel über die Abenteuer des Dschungels nachgedacht, und ich vollendete mit einem Farbstift meine erste Zeichnung. Meine Zeichnung Nr. 1. So sah sie aus:
Der kleine Prinz
Ich habe den großen Leuten mein Meisterwerk gezeigt und sie gefragt, ob ihnen meine Zeichnung nicht Angst mache.
Sie haben geantwortet: »Warum sollen wir vor einem Hut Angst haben?« Meine Zeichnung stellte aber keinen Hut dar. Sie stellte eine Riesenschlange dar, die einen Elefanten verdaut. Ich habe dann das Innere der Boa gezeichnet, um es den großen Leuten deutlich zu machen. Sie brauchen ja immer Erklärungen. Hier meine Zeichnung Nr. 2:
Der kleine Prinz
Die großen Leute haben mir geraten, mit den Zeichnungen von offenen oder geschlossenen Riesenschlangen aufzuhören und mich mehr für Geographie, Geschichte, Rechnen und Grammatik zu interessieren. So kam es daß ich eine großartige Laufbahn, die eines Malers nämlich, bereits im Alter von sechs Jahren aufgab. Der Mißerfolg meiner Zeichnungen Nr. 1 und Nr. 2 hatte mir den Mut genommen. Die großen Leute verstehen nie etwas von selbst, und für die Kinder ist es zu anstrengend, ihnen immer und immer wieder erklären zu müssen.
Ich war also gezwungen, einen anderen Beruf zu wählen, und lernte fliegen. Ich bin überall in der Welt herumgeflogen, und die Geographie hat mir dabei wirklich gute Dienste geleistet. Ich konnte auf den ersten Blick China von Arizona unterscheiden. Das ist sehr praktisch, wenn man sich in der Nacht verirrt hat.
So habe ich im Laufe meines Lebens mit einer Menge ernsthafter Leute zu tun gehabt. Ich bin viel mit Erwachsenen umgegangen und habe Gelegenheit gehabt, sie ganz aus der Nähe zu betrachten. Das hat meiner Meinung über sie nicht besonders gut getan.
Wenn ich jemanden traf, der mir ein bißchen heller vorkam, versuchte ich es mit meiner Zeichnung Nr. 1, die ich gut aufbewahrt habe. Ich wollte sehen, ob er wirklich etwas los hatte. Aber jedesmal bekam ich zur Antwort: »Das ist ein Hut.« Dann redete ich mit ihm weder über Boas, noch über Urwälder, noch über die Sterne. Ich stellte mich auf seinen Standpunkt. Ich sprach mit ihm über Bridge, Golf, Politik und Krawatten. Und der große Mensch war äußerst befriedigt, einen so vernünftigen Mann getroffen zu haben.
II
Ich blieb also allein, ohne jemanden, mit dem ich wirklich hätte sprechen können, bis ich vor sechs Jahren einmal eine Panne in der Wüste Sahara hatte. Etwas an meinem Motor war kaputtgegangen. Und da ich weder einen Mechaniker noch Passagiere bei mir hatte, machte ich mich ganz allein an die schwierige Reparatur. Es war für mich eine Frage auf Leben und Tod. Ich hatte für kaum acht Tage Trinkwasser mit.
Am ersten Abend bin ich also im Sande eingeschlafen, tausend Meilen von jeder bewohnten Gegend entfernt. Ich war viel verlassener als ein Schiffbrüchiger auf einem Floß mitten im Ozean. Ihr könnt euch daher meine Überraschung vorstellen, als bei Tagesanbruch eine seltsame kleine Stimme mich weckte:
»Bitte... zeichne mir ein Schaf!«
»Wie bitte?«
»Zeichne mir ein Schaf...«
Ich bin auf die Füße gesprungen, als wäre der Blitz in mich gefahren. Ich habe mir die Augen gerieben und genau hingeschaut. Da sah ich ein kleines, höchst ungewöhnliches Männchen, das mich ernsthaft betrachtete. Hier das beste Porträt, das ich später von ihm zuwege brachte.
Der kleine Prinz
Aber das Bild ist bestimmt nicht so bezaubernd wie das Modell. Ich kann nichts dafür. Ich war im Alter von sechs Jahren von den großen Leuten aus meiner Malerlaufbahn geworfen worden und hatte nichts zu zeichnen gelernt als geschlossene und offene Riesenschlangen.
Ich schaute mir die Erscheinung also mit großen, staunenden Augen an. Vergeßt nicht, daß ich mich tausend Meilen abseits jeder bewohnten Gegend befand. Auch schien mir mein kleines Männchen nicht verirrt, auch nicht halbtot vor Müdigkeit, Hunger, Durst oder Angst. Es machte durchaus nicht den Eindruck eines mitten in der Wüste verlorenen Kindes, tausend Meilen von jeder bewohnten Gegend. Als ich endlich sprechen konnte, sagte ich zu ihm:
»Aber... was machst denn du da?«
Da wiederholte es ganz sanft, wie eine sehr ernsthafte Sache:
»Bitte... zeichne mir ein Schaf...«
Wenn das Geheimnis zu eindrucksvoll ist, wagt man nicht zu widerstehen. So absurd es mir erschien - tausend Meilen von jeder menschlichen Behausung und in Todesgefahr -, ich zog aus meiner Tasche ein Blatt Papier und eine Füllfeder. Dann aber erinnerte ich mich, daß ich vor allem Geographie, Geschichte, Rechnen und Grammatik studiert hatte, und mißmutig sagte ich zu dem Männchen, daß ich nicht zeichnen könne. Es antwortete:
»Das macht nichts. Zeichne mir ein Schaf.«
Da ich nie ein Schaf gezeichnet hatte, machte ich ihm eine von den einzigen zwei Zeichnungen, die ich zuwege brachte.
Die von der geschlossenen Riesenschlange. Und ich war höchst verblüfft, als ich das Männchen sagen hörte:
»Nein, nein! Ich will keinen Elefanten in einer Riesenschlange. Eine Riesenschlange ist sehr gefährlich und ein Elefant braucht viel Platz. Bei mir zu Hause ist wenig Platz. Ich brauche ein Schaf. Zeichne mir ein Schaf.«
Also habe ich gezeichnet.
Der kleine Prinz
»Nein! Das ist schon sehr krank. Mach ein anderes.«
Ich zeichnete.
Der kleine Prinz
Mein Freund lächelte artig und mit Nachsicht:
»Du siehst wohl... das ist kein Schaf, das ist ein Widder. Es hat Hörner...«
Ich machte also meine Zeichnung noch einmal. Aber sie wurde ebenso abgelehnt wie die vorigen:
Der kleine Prinz
»Das ist schon zu alt. Ich will ein Schaf, das lange lebt.«
Mir ging die Geduld aus, es war höchste Zeit, meinen Motor auszubauen, so kritzelte ich diese Zeichnung da zusammen und knurrte dazu:
»Das ist die Kiste. Das Schaf, das du willst, steckt da drin.«
Der kleine Prinz
Und ich war höchst überrascht, als ich das Gesicht meines jungen Kritikers aufleuchten sah:
»Das ist ganz so, wie ich es mir gewünscht habe. Meinst du, daß dieses Schaf viel Gras braucht?«
»Warum?«
»Weil bei mir zu Hause alles ganz klein ist...«
»Es wird bestimmt ausreichen. Ich habe dir ein ganz kleines Schaf geschenkt.«
Er neigte den Kopf über die Zeichnung:
»Nicht so klein wie... Aber sieh nur! Es ist eingeschlafen...«
So machte ich die Bekanntschaft des kleinen Prinzen.
III
Ich brauchte lange Zeit, um zu verstehen, woher er kam. Der kleine Prinz, der viele Fragen am mich richtete, schien die meinen nie zu hören. Zufällig aufgefangene Worte haben mir nach und nach sein Geheimnis enthüllt. So fragte er, als er zum erstenmal mein Flugzeug sah (ich werde mein Flugzeug nicht zeichnen, das ist eine viel zu komplizierte Sache für mich):
Der kleine Prinz
»Was ist das für ein Ding da?« »Das ist kein Ding. Das fliegt. Das ist ein Flugzeug.«
Und ich war stolz, ihm sagen zu können, daß ich fliege. Da rief er:
»Wie! Du bist vom Himmel gefallen?«
»Ja«, sagte ich bescheiden.
»Ah! Das ist ja lustig...«
Und der kleine Prinz bekam einen ganz tollen Lachanfall, der mich ordentlich ärgerte. Ich lege Wert darauf, daß meine Unfälle ernst genommen werden. Er aber fuhr fort:
»Also auch du kommst vom Himmel! Von welchem Planeten bist du denn?«
Da ging mir ein Licht auf über das Geheimnis seiner Anwesenheit und ich fragte hastig:
»Du kommst also von einem anderen Planeten?«
Aber er antwortete nicht. Er schüttelte nur sanft den Kopf, indem er mein Flugzeug musterte:
Der kleine Prinz
»Freilich, auf dem Ding da kannst nicht allzu weit herkommen...«
Und er versank in eine Träumerei, die lange dauerte. Dann nahm er mein Schaf aus der Tasche und vertiefte sich in den Anblick seines Schatzes.
Ihr könnt euch vorstellen, wie stark diese Andeutung über die »anderen Planeten« mich beunruhigen mußte. Ich bemühte mich also, mehr zu erfahren:
»Woher kommst du, mein kleines Kerlchen? Wo bist du denn zu Hause? Wohin willst du mein Schaf mitnehmen?«
Er antwortete nach einem nachdenklichen Schweigen:
»Die Kiste, die du mir da geschenkt hast, hat das Gute, daß sie ihm nachts als Haus dienen kann.«
»Gewiß. Und wenn du brav bist, gebe ich dir auch einen Strick, um es tagsüber anzubinden. Und einen Pflock dazu.«
Dieser Vorschlag schien den kleinen Prinzen zu kränken:
»Anbinden? Was für eine komische Idee!«
»Aber wenn du es nicht anbindest, wird es doch weglaufen...«
Da brach meine Freund in ein neuerliches Gelächter aus:
»Aber wo soll es denn hinlaufen?«
»Irgendwohin. Geradeaus...«
Da versetzte der kleine Prinz ernsthaft:
»Das macht nichts aus, es ist so klein bei mir zu Hause!«
Und, vielleicht ein bißchen schwermütig, fügte er hinzu:
»Geradeaus kann man nicht sehr weit gehen...«
IV
Ich hatte eine zweite sehr wichtige Sache erfahren: der Planet seiner Herkunft war kaum größer als ein Haus!
Der kleine Prinz
Das erschien mir gar nicht verwunderlich. Ich wußte ja, daß es außer den großen Planeten wie der Erde, dem Jupiter, dem Mars, der Venus, denen man Namen gegeben hat, noch Hunderte von anderen gibt, die manchmal so klein sind, daß man Mühe hat, sie im Fernrohr zu sehen. Wenn ein Astronom einen von ihnen entdeckt, gibt er ihm statt des Namens eine Nummer. Er nennt ihn zum Beispiel: Asteroid Nr. 3.251.
Der kleine Prinz
Ich habe ernsthafte Gründe zu glauben, daß der Planet, von dem der kleine Prinz kam, der Asteroid B 612 ist. Dieser Planet ist nur ein einziges Mal im Jahre 1909 von einem türkischen Astronomen im Fernrohr gesehen worden.
Er hatte damals beim internationalen Astronomen- kongreß einen großen Vortrag über seine Entdeckung gehalten. Aber niemand hatte ihm geglaubt, und zwar ganz einfach seines Anzuges wegen. Die großen Leute sind so.
Der kleine Prinz
Zum Glück für den Ruf des Planeten B 612 befahl ein türkischer Diktator seinem Volk bei Todesstrafe, nur noch europäische Kleider zu tragen. Der Astronom wiederholte seinen Vortrag im Jahre 1920 in einem sehr eleganten Anzug. Und diesmal gaben sie ihm alle recht.
Wenn ich euch dieses nebensächliche Drum und Dran über den Planeten B 612 erzähle und euch sogar seine Nummer anvertraue, so geschieht das der großen Leute wegen. Die großen Leute haben eine Vorliebe für Zahlen. Wenn ihr ihnen von einem neuen Freund erzählt, befragen sie euch nie über das Wesentliche. Sie fragen euch nie: Wie ist der Klang seiner Stimme? Welche Spiele liebt er am meisten? Sammelt er Schmetterlinge? Sie fragen euch: Wie alt ist er? Wieviele Brüder hat er? Wieviel wiegt er? Wieviel verdient sein Vater? Dann erst glauben sie, ihn zu kennen. Wenn ihr zu den großen Leute sagt:
Ich habe ein sehr schönes Haus mit roten Ziegeln gesehen, mit Geranien vor den Fenstern und Tauben auf dem Dach... dann sind sie nicht imstande, sich dieses Haus vorzustellen. Man muß ihnen sagen: Ich habe ein Haus gesehen, das hunderttausend Franken wert ist. Dann schreien sie gleich: Ach wie schön!
So auch, wenn ihr ihnen sagt: Der Beweis dafür, daß es den kleinen Prinzen wirklich gegeben hat, besteht darin, daß er entzückend war, daß er lachte und daß er ein Schaf haben wollte; denn wenn man sich ein Schaf wünscht, ist es doch ein Beweis dafür, daß man lebt, - dann werden sie die Achseln zucken und euch als Kinder behandeln. Aber wenn ihr ihnen sagt: der Planet, von dem er kam, ist der Planet B 612, dann werden sie überzeugt sein und euch mit ihren Fragen in Ruhe lassen. So sind sie. Man darf ihnen das auch nicht übelnehmen. Kinder müssen mit großen Leuten viel Nachsicht haben.
Wir freilich, die wir wissen, was das Leben eigentlich ist, wir machen uns nur lustig über die albernen Zahlen. Viel lieber hätte ich diese Geschichte begonnen wie ein Märchen. Am liebsten hätte ich so angefangen:
Es war einmal ein kleiner Prinz, der wohnte auf einem Planeten, der kaum größer war als er selbst, und er brauchte einen Freund... Für die, die das Leben richtig verstehen, würde das viel glaubwürdiger klingen.
Denn ich möchte nicht, daß man mein Buch leicht nimmt. Ich empfinde so viel Kummer beim Erzählen dieser Erinnerungen. Es ist nun schon sechs Jahre her, daß mein Freund mit seinem Schaf davongegangen ist. Wenn ich hier versuche, ihn zu beschreiben, so tue ich das, um ihn nicht zu vergessen. Nicht jeder hat einen Freund gehabt. Und ich könnte wie die großen Leute werden, die sich nur für Ziffern interessieren, deshalb habe ich mir schließlich auch einen Farbenkasten und Zeichenstifte gekauft.
Es ist schwer, sich in meinem Alter noch einmal mit dem Zeichnen einzulassen, wenn man seit seinem sechsten Lebensjahre nie andere Versuche gemacht hat als die mit einer geschlossenen und offenen Klapperschlange. Ich werde selbstverständlich versuchen, die Bilder so wirklichkeitsgetreu wie möglich zu machen. Aber ich bin nicht ganz sicher, ob es mir gelingen wird. Die eine Zeichnung geht, die andere ist schon nicht mehr ähnlich. Ich irre mich auch mitunter in den Maßen. Da ist der kleine Prinz zu groß und da ist er zu klein. Auch die Farbe seiner Kleider macht mir Kummer. Dann probiere ich hin und her, so gut es eben geht. Ich werde mich vermutlich auch bei wichtigeren Einzelheiten irren. Aber das muß man doch schon nachsehen. Mein Freund hat mir nie Erklärungen gegeben. Er glaubte wahrscheinlich, ich sei wie er. Aber ich bin leider nicht imstande, durch die Kistenbretter hindurch Schafe zu sehen. Ich gleiche doch wohl schon eher den großen Leuten. Ich mußte ja im Laufe der Zeit älter werden.
V
Jeden Tag erfuhr ich etwas Neues über den Planeten, über die Abreise und über die Fahrt. Das ergab sich ganz sachte im Laufe meiner Überlegungen. So lernte ich am dritten Tage die Tragödie der Affenbrotbäume kennen. Auch dies verdanke ich schließlich dem Schaf, denn unvermittelt fragte mich der kleine Prinz, als wäre er von einem schweren Zweifel geplagt:
»Es stimmt doch, daß Schafe Stauden fressen?«
»Ja, das stimmt.«
»Ach, da bin ich froh!«
Ich verstand nicht, warum es so wichtig war, daß Schafe Stauden fressen. Aber der kleine Prinz fügte hinzu:
Der kleine Prinz
»Dann fressen sie doch auch Affenbrotbäume?«
Ich erklärte dem kleinen Prinzen ausführlich, daß Affenbrotbäume doch keine Stauden sind, sondern kirchturmhohe Bäume, und selbst wenn er eine ganze Herde Elefanten mitnähme, würde diese Herde nicht mit einem einzigen Affenbrotbaum fertig werden.
Der Einfall mit den Elefanten brachte in zum Lachen.
»Man müßte sie übereinanderstellen...«
Aber dann bemerkte er klugerweise:
»Bevor die Affenbrotbäume groß werden, fangen sie ja erst damit an, klein zu sein.«
»Das ist schon richtig. Aber warum willst du, daß deine Schafe die kleinen Affenbrotbäume fressen?«
Er antwortete: »Schon gut! Wir werden ja sehen!« als ob es sich da um das klarste Ding der Welt handelte. Und ich mußte meinen ganzen Verstand aufbieten, um der Sache auf den Grund zu kommen.
Der kleine Prinz
In der Tat gab es auf dem Planeten des kleinen Prinzen wie auf allen Planeten gute Gewächse und schlechte Gewächse. Infolgedessen auch gute Samenkörner von guten Gewächsen und schlechte Samenkörner von schlechten Gewächsen. Aber die Samen sind unsichtbar. Sie schlafen geheimnisvoll in der Erde, bis es einem von ihnen einfällt, aufzuwachen. Dann streckt er sich und treibt zuerst schüchtern einen entzückenden kleinen Sproß zur Sonne, einen ganz harmlosen. Wenn es sich um einen Radieschen- oder Rosentrieb handelt, kann man ihn wachsen lassen, wie er will. Aber wenn es sich um eine schädliche Pflanze handelt, muß man die Pflanze beizeiten herausreißen, sobald man erkannt hat, was für eine es ist. Auf dem Planeten des kleinen Prinzen gab es fürchterliche Samen... und das waren die Samen der Affenbrotbäume. Der Boden des Planeten war voll davon. Aber einen Affenbrotbaum kann man, wenn man ihn zu spät angeht, nie mehr loswerden. Er bemächtigt sich des ganzen Planeten. Er durchdringt ihn mit seinen Wurzeln. Und wenn der Planet zu klein ist und die Affenbrotbäume zu zahlreich werden, sprengen sie ihn.
Der kleine Prinz
»Es ist eine Frage der Disziplin«, sagte mir später der kleine Prinz. »Wenn man seine Morgentoilette beendet hat, muß man sich ebenso sorgfältig an die Toilette des Planeten machen. Man muß sich regelmäßig dazu zwingen, die die Sprößlinge der Affenbrotbäume auszureißen, sobald man sie von den Rosensträuchern unterscheiden kann, denen sie in der Jugend sehr ähnlich sehen. Das ist eine zwar langweilige, aber leichte Arbeit.«
Und eines Tages riet er mir, ich solle mich bemühen, eine schöne Zeichnung zustande zu bringen, damit es den Kindern bei mir daheim auch richtig in den Kopf gehe. »Wenn sie eines Tages auf die Reise gehen«, sagte er, »kann es ihnen zugute kommen. Zuweilen macht es ja wohl nichts aus, wenn man seine Arbeit auf später verschiebt. Aber wenn es sich um Affenbrotbäume handelt, führt das stets zur Katastrophe. Ich habe einen Planeten gekannt, den ein Faulpelz bewohnte. Er hatte drei Sträucher übersehen...«
Und so habe ich denn diesen Planeten nach den Angaben des kleinen Prinzen gezeichnet. Ich nehme nicht gerne den Tonfall eines Moralisten an. Aber die Gefährlichkeit der Affenbrotbäume ist so wenig bekannt, und die Gefahren, die jedem drohen, der sich auf einen Asteroiden verirrt, sind so beträchtlich ,daß ich für dieses eine Mal aus meiner Zurückhaltung heraustrete. Ich sage: Kinder, Achtung! Die Affenbrotbäume! Um meine Freunde auf eine Gefahr aufmerksam zu machen, die - unerkannt - ihnen wie mir seit langem droht, habe ich so viel an dieser Zeichnung gearbeitet. Die Lehre, die ich damit gebe, ist gewiß der Mühe wert. Ihr werdet euch vielleicht fragen: Warum enthält dieses Buch nicht noch andere, ebenso großartige Zeichnungen wie die Zeichnung von den Affenbrotbäumen ? Die Antwort ist sehr einfach: Ich habe wohl den Versuch gewagt, aber es ist mir nicht gelungen. Als ich die Affenbrotbäume zeichnete, war ich vom Gefühl der Dringlichkeit beseelt.
VI
Ach, kleiner Prinz, so nach und nach habe ich dein kleines schwermütiges Leben verstanden. Lange Zeit hast du, um dich zu zerstreuen, nichts anderes gehabt als die Lieblichkeit der Sonnenuntergänge. Das erfuhr ich am Morgen des vierten Tages, als du mir sagtest:
Der kleine Prinz
»Ich liebe Sonnenuntergänge sehr. Komm, laß uns einen Sonnenuntergang anschauen...«
»Da muß man noch warten...«
»Worauf denn warten?«
»Warten, bis die Sonne untergeht.«
Du hast zuerst ein sehr erstauntes Gesicht gemacht und dann über dich selber gelacht. Und du hast zu mir gesagt:
»Ich bilde mir immer ein, ich sei zu Hause!«
In der Tat. Wenn es in den Vereinigten Staaten Mittag ist, geht die Sonne, wie jedermann weiß, in Frankreich unter. Um dort einem Sonnenuntergang beizuwohnen, müßte man in einer Minute mach Frankreich fliegen können. Unglücklicherweise ist Frankreich viel zu weit weg. Aber auf deinem so kleinen Planeten genügte es, den Sessel um einige Schritte weiterzurücken. Und du erlebtest die Dämmerung, so oft du es wünschtest... »An einem Tag habe ich die Sonne dreiundvierzigmal untergehen sehn!«
Und ein wenig später fügtest du hinzu:
A po chvilce jsi dodal:
»Du weißt doch, wenn man recht traurig ist, liebt man die Sonnenuntergänge...«
»Am Tage mit den dreiundvierzigmal warst du also besonders traurig?« Aber der kleine Prinz antwortete nicht.
VII
Am fünften Tag war es wieder das Schaf, das ein Lebensgeheimnis des kleinen Prinzen enthüllen half. Er fragte mich unvermittelt, ohne Umschweife, als pflückte er die Frucht eines in langem Schweigen gereiften Problems:
»Wenn ein Schaf Sträucher frißt, so frißt es doch auch die Blumen?«
»Ein Schaf frißt alles, was ihm vors Maul kommt.«
»Auch die Blumen, die Dornen haben?«
»Ja. Auch die Blumen, die Dornen haben.«
»Wozu haben sie dann die Dornen?«
Ich wußte es nicht. Ich war gerade mit dem Versuch beschäftigt, einen zu streng angezogenen Bolzen meines Motors abzuschrauben. Ich war in großer Sorge, da mir meine Panne sehr bedenklich zu erscheinen begann, und ich machte mich aufs Schlimmste gefaßt, weil das Trinkwasser zur Neige ging.
»Was für einen Zweck haben die Dornen?«
Der kleine Prinz verzichtete niemals auf eine Frage, wenn er sie einmal gestellt hatte. Ich war völlig mit meinem Bolzen beschäftigt und antwortete aufs Geratewohl:
»Die Dornen, die haben gar keinen Zweck, die Blumen lassen sie aus reiner Bosheit wachsen!«
»Oh!«
Er schwieg. Aber dann warf er mir in einer Art Verärgerung zu:
»Das glaube ich dir nicht! Die Blumen sind schwach. Sie sind arglos. Sie schützen sich, wie sie können. Sie bilden sich ein, daß sie mit Hilfe der Dornen gefährlich wären...«
Ich antwortete nichts und sagte mir im selben Augenblick: Wenn dieser Bolzen noch lange bockt, werde ich ihn mit einem Hammerschlag heraushauen müssen.
Der kleine Prinz
Der kleine Prinz störte meine Überlegungen von neuem:
»Und du glaubst, daß die Blumen...«
»Aber nein! Aber nein! Ich glaube nichts! Ich habe irgend etwas dahergeredet. Wie du siehst, beschäftige ich mich mit wichtigeren Dingen!«
Er schaute mich verdutzt an.
»Mit wichtigeren Dingen!«
Er sah mich an, wie ich mich mit dem Hammer in der Hand und vom Schmieröl verschmutzten Händen über einen Gegenstand beugte, der ihm ausgesprochen häßlich erscheinen mußte.
»Du sprichst ja wie die großen Leute!«
Das beschämte mich. Er aber fügte unbarmherzig hinzu:
»Du verwechselst alles, du bringst alles durcheinander!«
Er war wirklich sehr aufgebracht. Er schüttelte sein goldenes Haar im Wind.
»Ich kenne einen Planeten, auf dem ein puterroter Herr haust. Er hat nie den Duft einer Blume geatmet. Er hat nie einen Stern angeschaut.
Er hat nie jemanden geliebt. Er hat nie etwas anderes als Additionen gemacht. Und den ganzen Tag wiederholt er wie du: Ich bin ein ernsthafter Mann! Ich bin ein ernsthafter Mann! Und das macht ihn ganz geschwollen vor Hochmut. Aber das ist kein Mensch, das ist ein Schwamm.«
»Ein was?«
»Ein Schwamm!«
Der kleine Prinz war jetzt ganz blaß vor Zorn.
»Es sind nun Millionen Jahre, daß die Blumen Dornen hervorbringen. Es sind Millionen Jahre, daß die Schafe trotzdem die Blumen fressen. Und du findest es unwichtig, wenn man wissen möchte, warum sie sich so viel Mühe geben, Dornen hervorzubringen, die zu nichts Zweck haben? Dieser Kampf der Schafe mit den Blumen soll unwichtig sein? Weniger ernsthaft als die Additionen eines dicken, roten Mannes? Und wenn ich eine Blume kenne, die es in der ganzen Welt nur ein einziges Mal gibt, nirgends anders als auf meinem kleinen Planeten, und wenn ein kleines Schaf, ohne zu wissen, was es tut, diese Blume eines Morgens so mit einem einzigen Biß auslöschen kann, - das soll nicht wichtig sein?!«
Er wurde rot vor Erregung und fuhr fort:
»Wenn einer eine Blume liebt, die es nur ein einziges Mal gibt auf allen Millionen und Millionen Sternen, dann genügt es ihm völlig, daß er zu ihnen hinaufschaut, um glücklich zu sein. Er sagt sich: Meine Blume ist da oben, irgendwo... Wenn aber das Schaf die Blume frißt, so ist es für ihn, als wären plötzlich alle Sterne ausgelöscht! Und das soll nicht wichtig sein?«
Er konnte nichts mehr sagen. Er brach plötzlich in Schluchzen aus. Die Nacht war hereingebrochen. Ich hatte mein Werkzeug weggelegt. Mein Hammer, mein Bolzen, der Durst und der Tod, alles war mir gleichgültig. Es galt auf einem Stern, einem Planeten, auf dem meinigen, hier auf der Erde, einen kleinen Prinzen zu trösten! Ich nahm ihn in die Arme. Ich wiegte ihn. Ich flüsterte ihm zu: »Die Blume, die du liebst, ist nicht in Gefahr... Ich werde ihm einen Maulkorb zeichnen, deinem Schaf... Ich werde dir einen Zaun für deine Blume zeichnen... Ich...« Ich wußte nicht, was ich noch sagen sollte. Ich kam mir sehr ungeschickt vor. Ich wußte nicht, wie ich zu ihm gelangen, wo ich ihn erreichen konnte. Es ist so geheimnisvoll, das Land der Tränen.
VIII
Bald sollte ich jene Blume besser kennenlernen. Es hatte auf dem Planeten des kleinen Prinzen immer schon Blumen gegeben, sehr einfache, aus einem einzigen Kranz von Blütenblättern geformt; sie spielten keine große Rolle und störten niemanden. Sie leuchteten eines Morgens im Grase auf und erloschen am Abend. Aber jene eine hatte eines Tages Wurzel geschlagen, aus einem Samen, weiß Gott woher, und der kleine Prinz hatte diesen Sproß, der den andern Sprößlingen nicht glich, sehr genau überwacht. Das konnte eine neue Art Affenbrotbaum sein. Aber der Strauch hörte bald auf zu wachsen und begann, eine Blüte anzusetzen. Der kleine Prinz, der der Entwicklung einer riesigen Knospe beiwohnte, fühlte wohl, es müsse eine wunderbare Erscheinung aus ihr hervorgehen, aber die Blume wurde nicht fertig damit, sich in ihrer grünen Kammer auf ihre Schönheit vorzubereiten. Sie wählte ihre Farben mit Sorgfalt, sie zog sich langsam an, sie ordnete ihre Blütenblätter eins nach dem andern. Sie wollte nicht wie die Mohnblüten ganz zerknittert herauskommen. Sie wollte nicht früher erscheinen als im vollen Ornat ihrer Schönheit. Nun ja! sie wollte gefallen. Ihre geheimnisvolle Toilette hatte also Tage und Tage gedauert. Und dann, eines Morgens, gerade zur Stunde des Sonnenaufganges, hatte sie sich enthüllt.
Der kleine Prinz
Und die, die mit solcher Genauigkeit gearbeitet hatte, sagte gähnend:
»Ach! ich bin kaum aufgewacht... Ich bitte um Verzeihung... Ich bin noch ganz zerrauft...«
Da konnte der kleine Prinz seine Bewunderung nicht mehr verhalten:
»Wie schön Sie sind!«
»Nicht wahr?« antwortete sanft die Blume. »Und ich bin zugleich mit der Sonne geboren...«
Der kleine Prinz erriet wohl, daß sie nicht allzu bescheiden war, aber sie war so rührend!
Der kleine Prinz
»Ich glaube, es ist Zeit zum Frühstücken«, hatte sie bald hinzugefügt, »hätten Sie die Güte, an mich zu denken?
Und völlig verwirrt hatte der kleine Prinz eine Gießkanne mit frischem Wasser geholt und die Blume bedient.
So hatte sie ihn sehr bald schon mit ihrer etwas scheuen Eitelkeit gequält. Eines Tages zum Beispiel, als sie von ihren vier Dornen sprach, hatte sie zum kleinen Prinzen gesagt:
»Sie sollen nur kommen, die Tiger, mit ihren Krallen!«
»Es gibt keine Tiger auf meinem Planeten«, hatte der kleine Prinz eingewendet, »und die Tiger fressen auch kein Gras.«
»Ich bin kein Gras«, hatte die Blume sanft geantwortet.
»Verzeihen Sie mir...«
»Ich fürchte mich nicht vor den Tigern, aber mir graut vor der Zugluft. Hätten Sie keinen Wandschirm?«
Grauen vor Zugluft?... Das sind schlechte Aussichten für eine Pflanze, hatte der kleine Prinz festgestellt. Diese Blume ist recht schwierig...
Der kleine Prinz
»Am Abend werden Sie mich unter einen Glassturz stellen. Es ist sehr kalt bei Ihnen. Das ist schlecht eingerichtet. Da, wo ich herkomme...«
Aber sie hatte sich unterbrochen. Sie war in Form eines Samenkorns gekommen. Sie hatte nichts von den anderen Welten wissen können. Beschämt, sich bei einer so einfältigen Lüge ertappen zu lassen, hatte sie zwei- oder dreimal gehustet, um den kleinen Prinzen ins Unrecht zu setzen:
»Der Wandschirm...?«
»Ich wollte ihn gerade holen, aber Sie sprachen mit mir!«
Der kleine Prinz
Dann hatte sie sich neuerlich zu ihrem Husten gezwungen, um ihm trotzdem Gewissensbisse aufzunötigen.
Der kleine Prinz
So hatte der kleine Prinz trotz des guten Willens seiner Liebe rasch an ihr zu zweifeln begonnen, ihre belanglosen Worte bitter ernst genommen und war sehr unglücklich geworden.
»Ich hätte nicht auf die hören sollen«, gestand er mir eines Tages. »Man darf den Blumen nicht zuhören, man muß sie anschauen und einatmen. Die meine erfüllte den Planeten mit Duft, aber ich konnte seiner nicht froh werden. Diese Geschichte mit den Krallen, die mich so gereizt hat, hätte mich rühren sollen.«
Er vertraute mir noch an:
»Ich habe das damals nicht verstehen können! Ich hätte sie nach ihrem Tun und nicht nach ihren Worten beurteilen sollen. Sie duftete und glühte für mich. Ich hätte niemals fliehen sollen! Ich hätte hinter all den armseligen Schlichen Ihre Zärtlichkeit erraten sollen. Die Blumen sind so widerspruchsvoll! Aber ich war zu jung, um sie lieben zu können.«
IX
Ich glaube, daß er zu seiner Flucht einen Zug wilder Vögel benutzt hat. Am Morgen seiner Abreise brachte er seinen Planeten schön in Ordnung. Sorgfältig fegte er seine tätigen Vulkane. Er besaß zwei tätige Vulkane, das war sehr praktisch zum Frühstückkochen. Er besaß auch einen erloschenen Vulkan. Da er sich aber sagte: Man kann nie wissen! fegte er auch den erloschenen Vulkan. Wenn sie gut gefegt werden, brennen die Vulkane sanft und regelmäßig, ohne Ausbrüche. Die Ausbrüche der Vulkane sind nichts weiter als Kaminbrände. Es ist klar: Wir auf unserer Erde sind viel zu klein, um unsere Vulkane zu kehren. Deshalb machen sie uns so viel Verdruß.
Der kleine Prinz riß auch ein bißchen schwermütig die letzten Triebe des Affenbrotbaumes aus. Er glaubte nicht, daß er jemals zurückkehren müsse. Aber alle diese vertrauten Arbeiten erschienen ihm an diesem Morgen ungemein süß. Und, als er die Blume zum letztenmal begoß und sich anschickte, sie unter den Schutz der Glasglocke zu stellen, entdeckte er in sich das Bedürfnis zu weinen.
»Adieu«, sagte er zur Blume.
Aber sie antwortete ihm nicht.
»Adieu«, wiederholte er.
Die Blume hustete. Aber das kam nicht von der Erkältung.
»Ich bin dumm gewesen«, sagte sie endlich zu ihm. »Ich bitte dich um Verzeihung. Versuche, glücklich zu sein.«
Der kleine Prinz
Es überraschte ihn, daß die Vorwürfe ausblieben. Er stand ganz fassungslos da, mit der Glasglocke in der Hand. Er verstand diese stille Sanftmut nicht.
»Aber ja, ich liebe dich«, sagte die Blume. »Du hast nichts davon gewußt. Das ist meine Schuld. Es ist ganz unwichtig. Aber du warst ebenso dumm wie ich. Versuche, glücklich zu sein... Laß diese Glasglocke liegen! Ich will sie nicht mehr...«
»Aber der Wind...«
»Ich bin nicht so stark erkältet, daß... Die frische Nachtluft wird mir gut tun. Ich bin eine Blume.«
»Aber die Tiere...«
»Ich muß wohl zwei oder drei Raupen aushalten, wenn ich die Schmetterlinge kennenlernen will. Auch das scheint sehr schön zu sein. Wer wird mich sonst besuchen? Du wirst ja weit weg sein. Was aber die großen Tiere angeht, so fürchte ich mich nicht. Ich habe meine Krallen.«
Und sie zeigt treuherzig ihre vier Dornen. Dann fügte sie noch hinzu:
»Zieh es nicht so in die Länge, das ist ärgerlich. Du hast dich entschlossen zu reisen. So geh!«
Denn sie wollte nicht, daß er sie weinen sähe. Es war eine so stolze Blume.
X
Er befand sich in der Region der Asteroiden 325, 326, 327, 328, 329 und 330. Er begann also, sie zu besuchen, um sich zu beschäftigen und um sich zu bilden.
Auf dem ersten wohnte ein König.
Der König thronte in Purpur und Hermelin auf einem sehr einfachen und dabei sehr königlichen Thron.
»Ah! Sieh da, ein Untertan«, rief der König, als er den kleinen Prinzen sah.
Und der kleine Prinz fragte sich: Wie kann er mich kennen, da er mich noch nie gesehen hat!
Er wußte nicht, daß für die Könige die Welt etwas höchst Einfaches ist: Alle Menschen sind Untertanen.
»Komm naher, daß ich dich besser sehe«, sagte der König und war ganz stolz, daß er endlich für jemanden König war.
Der kleine Prinz
Der kleine Prinz schaute sich nach einer Sitzgelegenheit um, aber der ganze Planet war bedeckt von dem herrlichen Hermelinmantel.
Er blieb also stehen, und da er müde war, gähnte er.
Es verstößt gegen die Etikette, in Gegenwart eines Königs zu gähnen«, sagte der Monarch. »Ich verbiete es dir.«
»Ich kann es nicht unterdrücken«, antwortete der kleine Prinz ganz verwirrt. »Ich habe eine weite Reise gemacht und habe nicht geschlafen...«
»Dann«, sagte der König, »befehle ich dir zu gähnen. Ich habe seit Jahren niemanden gähnen sehen, das Gähnen ist für mich eine Seltenheit. Los! gähne noch einmal! Es ist ein Befehl.«
»Das ängstigt mich, ich kann nicht mehr...«, stammelte der kleine Prinz und errötete.
»Hm, hm!« antwortete der König. »Also dann... befehle ich dir, bald zu gähnen und bald...«
Er murmelte ein bißchen und schien verärgert.
Denn der König hielt in hohem Maße darauf, daß man seine Autorität respektiere. Er duldete keinen Ungehorsam. Er war ein absoluter Monarch. Aber da er sehr gütig war, gab er vernünftige Befehle.
»Wenn ich geböte«, pflegte er zu sagen, »wenn ich einem General geböte, sich in einen Seevogel zu verwandeln, und wenn dieser General nicht gehorchte, es wäre nicht die Schuld des Generals. Es wäre meine Schuld.«
»Darf ich mich setzen?« fragte schüchtern der kleine Prinz.
»Ich befehle dir, dich zu setzen«, antwortete der König und zog einen Zipfel seines Hermelinmantels majestätisch an sich heran.
Aber der kleine Prinz staunte. Der Planet war winzig klein. Worüber konnte der König wohl herrschen?
»Herr«, sagte er zu ihm... »ich bitte, verzeiht mir, daß ich Euch frage...«
»Ich befehle dir, mich zu fragen«, beeilte sich der König zu sagen.
»Herr... worüber herrscht Ihr?«
Über alles«, antwortete der König mit großer Einfachheit.
»Über alles?«
Der König wies mit einer bedeutsamen Gebärde auf seinen Planeten, auf die anderen Planeten und auf die Sterne.
»Über all das?« sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Über all das...«, antwortete der König.
Denn er war nicht nur ein absoluter Monarch, sondern ein universeller.
»Und die Sterne gehorchen Euch?«
»Gewiß«, sagte der König. »sie gehorchen aufs Wort. Ich dulde keinen Ungehorsam.«
Solche Macht verwunderte den kleinen Prinzen sehr. Wenn er sie selbst gehabt hätte, wäre es ihm möglich gewesen, nicht dreiundvierzig, sondern zweiundsiebzig oder sogar hundert oder selbst zweihundert Sonnenuntergängen an ein und demselben Tage beizuwohnen, ohne daß er seinen Sessel hätte rücken müssen. Und da er sich in der Erinnerung an seinen kleinen verlassenen Planeten ein bißchen traurig fühlte, faßte er sich ein Herz und bat den König um eine Gnade:
»Ich möchte einen Sonnenuntergang sehen... Machen Sie mir die Freude... Befehlen Sie der Sonne unterzugehen...«
»Wenn ich einem General geböte, nach der Art der Schmetterlinge von einer Blume zu andern zu fliegen oder eine Tragödie zu schreiben oder sich in einen Seevogel zu verwandeln, und wenn dieser General den erhaltenen Befehl nicht ausführte, wer wäre im Unrecht, er oder ich?«
»Sie wären es«, sagte der kleine Prinz überzeugt.
»Richtig. Man muß von jedem fordern, was er leisten kann«, antwortete der König. »Die Autorität beruht vor allem auf der Vernunft. Wenn du deinem Volke befiehlst, zu marschieren und sich ins Meer zu stürzen, wird es revoltieren. Ich habe das Recht, Gehorsam zu fordern, weil meine Befehl vernünftig sind.«
»Was ist also mit meinem Sonnenuntergang?« erinnerte der kleine Prinz, der niemals eine Frage vergaß, wenn er sie einmal gestellt hatte.
»Deinen Sonnenuntergang wirst du haben. Ich werde ihn befehlen. Aber in meiner Herrscherweisheit werde ich warten, bis die Bedingungen dafür günstig sind.«
»Wann wird das sein?« erkundigte sich der kleine Prinz.
»Hm, hm!« antwortete der König, der zunächst einen großen Kalender studierte, »hm, hm! Das wir sein gegen... gegen... das wird heute abend gegen sieben Uhr vierzig sein! Und du wirst sehen, wie man mir gehorcht.«
Der kleine Prinz gähnte. Es tat ihm leid um den versäumten Sonnenuntergang. Er langweilte sich schon ein bißchen.
»Ich habe hier nichts mehr zu tun«, sagte er zum König. »Ich werde wieder abreisen!«
»Reise nicht ab«, antwortete der König, der so stolz war, einen Untertanen zu haben, »ich mache dich zum Minister!«
»Zu was für einem Minister?«
»Zum... zum Justizminister!«
»Aber es ist niemand da, über den man richten könnte!«
»Das weiß man nicht«, sagte der König. »Ich habe die Runde um mein Königreich noch nicht gemacht. Ich bin sehr alt, ich habe keine Platz für einen Wagen und das Gehen macht mich müde.«
»Oh! Aber ich habe schon gesehen«, sagte der kleine Prinz, der sich bückte, um einen Blick auf die andere Seite des Planeten zu werfen, »es ist auch dort drüben niemand...«
»Du wirst also über dich selbst richten«, antwortete ihm der König. »Das ist das Schwerste. Es ist viel schwerer, sich selbst zu verurteilen, als über andere zu richten. Wenn es dir gelingt, über dich selbst gut zu Gericht zu sitzen, dann bist du ein wirklicher Weiser.«
»Ich«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »ich kann über mich richten, wo immer ich bin. Dazu brauche ich nicht hier zu wohnen.«
»Hm, hm!« sagte der König, »ich glaube, daß es auf meinem Planeten irgendwo eine alte Ratte gibt. Ich höre sie in der Nacht. Du könntest Richter über dies alte Ratte sein. Du wirst sie von Zeit zu Zeit zum Tode verurteilen. So wird ihr Leben von deiner Rechtsprechung abhängen. Aber du wirst sie jedesmal begnadigen, um sie aufzusparen. Es gibt nur eine.«
»Ich liebe es nicht, zum Tode zu verurteilen«, antwortete der kleine Prinz, »und ich glaube wohl, daß ich jetzt gehe.«
»Nein«, sagte der König.
Aber der kleine Prinz, der seine Vorbereitungen bereits getroffen hatte, wollte dem alten Monarchen nicht wehtun:
»Wenn Eure Majestät Wert auf pünktlichen Gehorsam legen, könnten Sie mir einen vernünftigen Befehl erteilen. Sie könnten mir zum Beispiel befehlen, innerhalb eine Minute zu verschwinden. Es scheint mir, daß die Umstände günstig sind...«
Da der König nichts erwiderte, zögerte der kleine Prinz zuerst, dann brach er mit einem Seufzer auf.
»Ich mache dich zu meinem Gesandten«, beeilte sich der König, ihm nachzurufen.
Er gab sich den Anschein großer Autorität.
Die großen Leute sind sehr sonderbar, sagte sich der kleine Prinz auf seiner Reise.
XI
Der zweite Planet war von einem Eitlen bewohnt.
»Ah, ah, schau, schau, ein Bewunderer kommt zu Besuch!« rief der Eitle von weitem, sobald er des kleinen Prinzen ansichtig wurde.
Der kleine Prinz
Denn für die Eitlen sind die anderen Leute Bewunderer.
»Guten Tag«, sagte der kleine Prinz. »Sie haben einen spaßigen Hut auf.«
»Der ist zum Grüßen«, antwortete ihm der Eitle. »Er ist zum Grüßen, wenn man mir zujauchzt. Unglücklicherweise kommt hier niemand vorbei.«
»Ach ja?« sagte der kleine Prinz, der nichts davon begriff.
Schlag deine Hände zusammen«, empfahl ihm der Eitle.
Der kleine Prinz schlug seine Hände gegeneinander. Der Eitle grüßte bescheiden, indem er seinen Hut lüftete.
Das ist unterhaltender als der Besuch beim König, sagte sich der kleine Prinz.
Und er begann von neuem die Hände zusammenzuschlagen. Der Eitle wieder fuhr fort, seinen Hut grüßend zu lüften.
Nach fünf Minuten wurde der kleine Prinz der Eintönigkeit dieses Spieles überdrüssig:
»Und was muß man tun«, fragte er, »damit der Hut herunterfällt?«
Aber der Eitle hörte ihn nicht. Die Eitlen hören immer nur die Lobreden.
»Bewunderst du mich wirklich sehr?« fragte er den kleinen Prinzen.
»Was heißt bewundern?«
»Bewundern heißt erkennen, daß ich der schönste, der bestangezogene, der reichste und der intelligenteste Mensch des Planeten bin.«
»Mach mir die Freude, bewundere mich trotzdem!«
»Ich bewundere dich«, sagte der kleine Prinz, indem er ein bißchen die Schultern hob, »aber wozu nimmst du das wichtig?«
Und der kleine Prinz machte sich davon.
Die großen Leute sind entschieden sehr verwunderlich, stellte er auf seiner Reise fest.
XII
Der kleine Prinz
Den nächsten Planeten bewohnte ein Säufer. Dieser Besuch war sehr kurz, aber er tauchte den kleinen Prinzen in eine tiefe Schwermut.
»Was machst du da?« fragte er den Säufer, den er stumm vor einer Reihe leerer und einer Reihe voller Flaschen sitzend antraf.
»Ich trinke«, antwortete der Säufer mit düsterer Miene.
»Warum trinkst du?« fragte ihn der kleine Prinz.
»Um zu vergessen«, antwortete der Säufer.
»Um was zu vergessen?« erkundigte sich der kleine Prinz, der ihn schon bedauerte.
»Um zu vergessen, daß ich mich schäme«, gestand der Säufer und senkte den Kopf.
»Weshalb schämst du dich?« fragte der kleine Prinz, der den Wunsch hatte, ihm zu helfen.
»Weil ich saufe!« endete der Säufer und verschloß sich endgültig in sein Schweigen.
Und der kleine Prinz verschwand bestürzt.
Die großen Leute sind entschieden sehr, sehr wunderlich, sagte zu sich auf seiner Reise.
XIII
Der vierte Planet war der des Geschäftsmannes. Dieser Mann war so beschäftigt, daß er bei der Ankunft der kleinen Prinzen nicht einmal den Kopf hob.
»Guten Tag«, sagte dieser zu ihm. »Ihre Zigarette ist ausgegangen.«
»Drei und zwei ist fünf. Fünf und sieben ist zwölf. Zwölf und drei ist fünfzehn. Guten Tag. Fünfzehn und sieben ist zweiundzwanzig. Zweiundzwanzig und sechs ist achtundzwanzig. Keine Zeit, sie wieder anzuzünden. Sechsundzwanzig und fünf ist einunddreißig. Uff! Das macht also fünfhunderteine Million, sechshundertzweiundzwanzigtausendsiebenhunderteinunddreißig.«
»Fünfhundert Millionen wovon?«
»Wie? Du bist immer noch da? Fünfhunderteine Million von... ich weiß nicht mehr... ich habe so viel Arbeit! Ich bin ein ernsthafter Mann, ich gebe mich nicht mit Kindereien ab. Zwei und fünf ist sieben...«
»Fünfhunderteine Million wovon?« wiederholte der kleine Prinz, der niemals in seinem Leben auf eine Frage verzichtete, die er einmal gestellt hatte.
Der Geschäftsmann hob den Kopf.
»In den vierundfünfzig Jahren, die ich auf diesem Planeten wohne, bin ich nur dreimal gestört worden. Das erstemal war es vor zweiundzwanzig Jahren ein Maikäfer, der von weiß Gott wo heruntergefallen war. Er machte einen schrecklichen Lärm, und ich habe in einer Addition vier Fehler gemacht. Das zweitemal, vor elf Jahren, war es ein Anfall von Rheumatismus. Es fehlt mir an Bewegung. Ich habe nicht Zeit, herumzubummeln. Ich bin ein ernsthafter Mann. Und das ist nun das drittemal! Ich sagte also, fünfhunderteine Million...«
»Millionen wovon?«
Der kleine Prinz
Der Geschäftsmann begriff, daß es keine Aussicht auf Frieden gab:
»Millionen von diesen kleinen Dingern, die man manchmal am Himmel sieht.«
»Fliegen?«
»Aber nein, kleine Dinger, die glänzen.«
»Bienen?«
»Aber nein. Kleine goldene Dinger, von denen die Nichtstuer träumerisch werden. Ich bin ein ernsthafter Mann. Ich habe nicht Zeit zu Träumereien.«
»Ach, die Sterne?«
»Dann sind es wohl die Sterne.«
»Und was machst du mit fünfhundert Millionen Sternen?«
»Fünfhunderteine Million sechshundertzweiundzwanzigtausensiebenhunderteinunddreißig. Ich bin ein ernsthafter Mann, ich nehme es genau.«
»Und was machst du mit diesen Sternen?«
»Was ich damit mache?«
»Ja.«
»Nichts. Ich besitze sie.«
»Du besitzt die Sterne?«
»Ja.«
»Aber ich habe schon einen König gesehen, der...«
»Könige besitzen nicht, sie 'regieren über'. Das ist etwas ganz anderes.«
»Und was hast du davon, die Sterne zu besitzen?«
»Das macht mich reich.«
»Und was hast du vom Reichsein?«
»Weitere Sterne kaufen, wenn jemand welche findet.« Der da, sagte sich der kleine Prinz, denkt ein bißchen wie mein Säufer.
Indessen stellte er noch weitere Fragen:
»Wie kann man die Sterne besitzen?«
»Wem gehören sie?« erwiderte mürrisch der Geschäftsmann.
»Ich weiß nicht. Niemandem.«
»Dann gehören sie mir, ich habe als erster daran gedacht.«
»Das genügt?«
»Gewiß. Wenn du einen Diamanten findest, der niemandem gehört, dann ist er dein. Wenn du eine Insel findest, die niemandem gehört, so ist sie dein. Wenn du als erster einen Einfall hast und du läßt ihn patentieren, so ist er dein. Und ich, ich besitze die Sterne, da niemand vor mir daran gedacht hat, sie zu besitzen.«
»Das ist wahr«, sagte der kleine Prinz. »Und was machst du damit?«
»Ich verwalte sie. Ich zähle sie und zähle sie wieder«, sagte der Geschäftsmann. »Das ist nicht leicht. Aber ich bin ein ernsthafter Mann.«
Der kleine Prinz war noch nicht zufrieden. »Wenn ich eine Seidenschal habe, kann ich ihn um meinen Hals wickeln und mitnehmen. Wenn ich eine Blume habe, kann ich meine Blume pflücken und mitnehmen. Aber du kannst die Sterne nicht pflücken!«
»Nein, aber ich kann sie in die Bank legen.«
»Was soll das heißen?«
»Das heißt, daß ich die Zahl meiner Sterne auf ein kleines Papier schreibe. Und dann sperre ich diese Papiers in eine Schublade.«
»Und das ist alles?«
»Das genügt.«
Das ist amüsant, dachte der kleine Prinz. Es ist fast dichterisch. Aber es ist nicht ganz ernst zu nehmen.
Der kleine Prinz dachte über die ernsthaften Dinge völlig anders als die großen Leute.
»Ich«, sagte er noch, »ich besitze eine Blume, die ich jeden Tag begieße. Ich besitze drei Vulkane, die ich jede Woche kehre. Denn ich kehre auch den erloschenen. Man kann nie wissen. Es ist gut für meine Vulkane und gut für meine Blume, daß ich sie besitze. Aber du bist für die Sterne zu nichts nütze...«
Der Geschäftsmann öffnete den Mund, aber er fand keine Antwort, und der kleine Prinz verschwand.
Die großen Leute sind entschieden ganz ungewöhnlich, sagte er sich auf der Reise.
XIV
Der fünfte Planet war sehr sonderbar. Er war der kleinste von allen. Es war da gerade Platz genug für eine Straßenlaterne und einen Laternenanzünder.
Der kleine Prinz konnte sich nicht erklären, wozu man irgendwo im Himmel, auf einem Planeten ohne Haus und ohne Bewohner, eine Straßenlaterne und einen Laternenanzünder braucht. Doch sagte er sich:
Es kann ganz gut sein, daß dieser Mann ein bißchen verrückt ist. Doch ist er weniger verrückt als der König, der Eitle, der Geschäftsmann und der Säufer. Seine Arbeit hat wenigstens einen Sinn. Wenn er seine Laterne anzündet, so ist es, als setze er einen neuen Stern in die Welt, oder eine Blume. Wenn er seine Laterne auslöscht, so schlafen Stern oder Blume ein. Das ist eine sehr hübsche Beschäftigung. Es ist auch wirklich nützlich, da es hübsch ist.
Als er auf dem Planeten ankam, grüßte er den Laternenanzünder ehrerbietig.
»Guten Tag. Warum hast Du Deine Laterne eben ausgelöscht?«
»Ich habe die Weisung«, antwortete der Anzünder. »Guten Tag.«
»Was ist das, die Weisung?«
»Die Weisung, meine Laterne auszulöschen. Guten Abend.«
Und er zündete sie wieder an.
»Aber warum hast Du sie soeben wieder angezündet?«
»Das ist die Weisung.«, antwortete der Anzünder.
»Ich verstehe nicht«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Da ist nichts zu verstehen« sagte der Anzünder. »Die Weisung ist eben die Weisung. Guten Tag.«
Und er löschte seine Laterne wieder aus. Dann trocknete er sich die Stirn mit einem rotkarierten Taschentuch.
»Ich tue da einen schrecklichen Dienst. Früher ging es vernünftig zu. Ich löschte am Morgen aus und zündete am Abend an. Den Rest des Tages hatte ich zum Ausruhn und den Rest der Nacht zum Schlafen...«
»Seit damals wurde die Weisung geändert?«
»Die Weisung wurde nicht geändert« sagte der Anzünder. »Das ist ja das Trauerspiel! Der Planet hat sich von Jahr zu Jahr schneller und schneller gedreht und die Weisung ist die gleiche geblieben!«
Der kleine Prinz
»Und?«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Und jetzt, da er in der Minute eine Umdrehung macht, habe ich nicht mehr eine Sekunde Ruhe. Jede Minute zünde ich einmal an, lösche ich einmal aus!«
»Das ist drollig! Die Tage dauern bei dir eine Minute!«
»Das ist ganz und gar nicht drollig«, sagte der Anzünder. »Das ist nun schon ein Monat, daß wir miteinander sprechen.«
»Ein Monat?«
»Ja, dreißig Minuten. Dreißig Tage! Guten Abend.«
Und er zündete seine Laterne wieder an.
Der kleine Prinz sah ihm zu, und er liebte diesen Anzünder, der sich so treu an seine Weisung hielt. Er erinnerte sich der Sonnenuntergänge, die er einmal gesucht hatte und um deretwillen er seinen Sessel rückte. Er wollte seinem Freund beispringen:
»Weißt du ... ich kenne ein Mittel, wie du dich ausruhen könntest, wenn du wolltest...«
»Ich will immer«, sagte der Anzünder.
Denn man kann treu und faul zugleich sein. Der kleine Prinz fuhr fort:
»Dein Planet ist so klein, daß Du mit drei Sprüngen herumkommst. Du mußt nur langsam genug gehen, um immer in der Sonne zu bleiben. Willst Du dich ausruhen, dann gehst Du... und der Tag wird so lange dauern, wie Du willst.«
»Das hat nicht viel Witz«, sagte der Anzünder, »was ich im Leben liebe, ist der Schlaf.«
»Dann ist es aussichtslos«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Aussichtslos«, sagte der Anzünder. »Guten Tag.«
Und er löschte seine Lampe aus.
Der, sagte sich der kleine Prinz, während er seine Reise fortsetzte, der wird von allen anderen verachtet werden, vom König, vom Eitlen, vom Säufer, vom Geschäftsmann. Dabei ist er der einzige, den ich nicht lächerlich finde. Das kommt vielleicht daher, weil er sich mit anderen Dingen beschäftigt statt mit sich selbst.
Er stieß einen Seufzer des Bedauerns aus und sagte sich noch:
Der ist der einzige, den ich zu meinem Freund hätte machen können. Aber sein Planet ist wirklich zu klein. Es ist nicht viel Platz für zwei...
Was sich der kleine Prinz nicht einzugestehen wagte, war, daß er diesem gesegneten Planeten nachtrauerte, besonders der tausendvierhundertvierzig Sonnenuntergänge wegen, in vierundzwanzig Stunden!
XV
Der sechste Planet war zehnmal so groß. Er war von einem alten Herrn bewohnt, der ungeheure Bücher schrieb.
»Da schau! Ein Forscher!« rief er, als er den kleinen Prinzen sah.
Der kleine Prinz setzte sich an den Tisch und verschnaufte ein wenig. Er war schon so viel gereist!
»Woher kommst Du?« fragte ihn der alte Herr. »Was ist das für ein dickes Buch?« sagte der kleine Prinz. »Was machen Sie da?«
»Ich bin Geograph«, sagte der alte Herr.
»Was ist das, ein Geograph?«
»Das ist ein Gelehrter, der weiß, wo sich die Meere, die Ströme, die Städte, die Berge und die Wüsten befinden.«
»Das ist sehr interessant«, sagte der kleine Prinz. »Endlich ein richtiger Beruf!«
Und er warf einen Blick um sich auf den Planeten des Geographen. Er hatte noch nie einen so majestätischen Planeten gesehen.
»Er ist sehr schön, Euer Planet. Gibt es da auch Ozeane?«
»Das kann ich nicht wissen«, sagte der Geograph.
»Ach!« Der kleine Prinz war enttäuscht. »Und Berge?«
»Das kann ich auch nicht wissen«, sagte der Geograph.
»Aber ihr seid Geograph! - Und Städte und Flüsse und Wüsten?«
»Auch das kann ich nicht wissen.«
»Aber ihr seid doch Geograph!«
»Richtig«, sagte der Geograph, »aber ich bin nicht Forscher. Es fehlt uns gänzlich an Forschern. Nicht der Geograph geht die Städte, die Ströme, die Berge, die Meere, die Ozeane und die Wüsten zählen. Der Geograph ist zu wichtig, um herumzustreunen. Er verläßt seinen Schreibtisch nicht. Aber er empfängt die Forscher. Er befragt sie und schreibt sich ihre Eindrücke auf. Und wenn ihm die Notizen eines Forschers beachtenswert erscheinen, läßt der Geograph über dessen Moralität eine amtliche Untersuchung anstellen.«
»Warum das?«
»Weil ein Forscher, der lügt, in den Geographiebüchern Katastrophen herbeiführen würde. Und auch ein Forscher, der zuviel trinkt.«
»Wie das?«, fragte der kleine Prinz.
»Weil die Säufer doppelt sehen. Der Geograph würde dann zwei Berge einzeichnen, wo nur ein einziger vorhanden ist.«
»Ich kenne einen«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »der wäre ein schlechter Forscher.«
»Das ist möglich. Doch wenn die Moralität des Forschers gut zu sein scheint, macht man eine Untersuchung über seine Entdeckung.«
»Geht man nachsehen?«
Der kleine Prinz
»Nein. Das ist zu umständlich. Aber man verlangt vom Forscher, daß er Beweise liefert. Wenn es sich zum Beispiel um die Entdeckung eines großen Berges handelt, verlangt man, daß er große Steine mitbringt.«
Plötzlich ereiferte sich der Geograph.
»Und du, du kommst von weit her! Du bist ein Forscher! Du wirst mir Deinen Planeten beschreiben!«
Und der Geograph schlug sein Registrierbuch auf und spitzte einen Bleistift.
Zuerst notiert man die Erzählungen der Forscher mit Bleistift. Um sie mit Tinte aufzuschreiben, wartet man, bis der Forscher Beweise geliefert hat.>
»Nun?« fragte der Geograph.
»Oh, bei mir zu Hause«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »ist nicht viel los, da ist es ganz klein. Ich habe drei Vulkane. Zwei Vulkane in Tätigkeit und einen erloschenen. Aber man kann nie wissen.«
»Man weiß nie«, sagte der Geograph.
»Ich habe auch eine Blume.«
»Wir schreiben Blumen nicht auf«, sagte der Geograph.
»Warum das? Sie sind das Schönste!«
»Weil Blumen vergänglich sind.«
»Was heißt 'vergänglich'?«
»Die Geographiebücher«, entgegnete der Geograph, »sind die wertvollsten von allen Büchern. Sie veralten nie. Es ist sehr selten, daß ein Berg seinen Platz wechselt. Es ist sehr selten, daß ein Ozean seine Wasser ausleert. Wir schreiben die ewigen Dinge auf.«
»Aber die erloschenen Vulkane können wieder aufwachen«, unterbrach der kleine Prinz. »Was bedeutet 'vergänglich'?«
»Ob die Vulkane erloschen oder tätig sind, kommt für uns aufs gleiche hinaus«, sagte der Geograph. »Was für uns zählt, ist der Berg. Er verändert sich nicht.«
»Aber was bedeutet 'vergänglich'?« wiederholte der kleine Prinz, der in seinem Leben noch nie auf eine einmal gestellte Frage verzichtet hatte.
»Das heißt 'von baldigem Entschwinden bedroht'.«
»Ist meine Blume von baldigem Entschwinden bedroht?«
»Gewiß.«
Meine Blume ist vergänglich, sagte sich der kleine Prinz, und sie hat nur vier Dornen, um sich gegen die Welt zu wehren! Und ich habe sie ganz allein zu Hause zurückgelassen!
Das war die erste Regung seiner Reue. Aber er faßte wieder Mut.
»Was raten Sie mir, wohin ich gehen soll?« fragte er.
»Auf den Planeten Erde«, antwortete der Geograph, »er hat einen guten Ruf...«
Und der kleine Prinz machte sich auf und dachte an seine Blume.
XVI
Der siebente Planet war also die Erde.
Die Erde ist nicht irgendein Planet! Man zählt da hundertelf Könige, wenn man, wohlgemerkt, die Negerkönige nicht vergißt, siebentausend Geographen, neunhunderttausend Geschäftsleute, siebeneinhalb Millionen Säufer, dreihundertelf Millionen Eitle, kurz - ungefähr zwei Milliarden erwachsene Leute.
Um euch einen Begriff von den Ausmaßen der Erde zu geben, muß ich euch sagen, daß man vor der Erfindung der Elektrizität dort auf allen sechs Kontinenten zusammen eine ganze Armee von vierhundertzweiundsechzigtausendfünfhundertelf Laternenanzündern im Dienst hatte.
Von einiger Entfernung aus gesehen, wirkte das prächtig. Die Bewegungen dieser Armee waren gedrillt, wie die eines Opernballetts. Den Reigen begannen die Anzünder der neuseeländischen und australischen Laternen. Hatten sie ihre Lampen angezündet, gingen sie schlafen. Dann traten die Laternenanzünder von China und Sibirien zum Tanze an. Auch sie verschwanden hinter den Kulissen. Dann kamen die russischen und indischen Laternenanzünder an die Reihe. Dann die von Afrika und Europa. Dann die von Südamerika. Dann die von Nordamerika. Und niemals irrten sie sich in der Reihenfolge ihres Auftritts. Es war großartig.
Nur der Anzünder der einzigen Laterne am Nordpol und sein Kollege von der einzigen Laterne am Südpol führten ein Leben voll Müßiggang und Gemütlichkeit: sie arbeiteten zweimal im Jahr.
XVII
Will man geistreich sein, dann kommt es vor, daß man ein bißchen aufschneidet. Ich war nicht ganz aufrichtig, als ich euch von den Laternenanzündern erzählte. Ich laufe Gefahr, denen, die unseren Planeten nicht kennen, ein falsches Bild von ihm zu geben. Die Menschen benutzen nur sehr wenig Raum auf der Erde. Wenn die zwei Milliarden Einwohner, die die Erde bevölkern, sich aufrecht und ein bißchen gedrängt hinstellten, wie bei einer Volksversammlung etwa, kämen sie auf einem öffentlichen Platz von zwanzig Meilen Länge und zwanzig Meilen Breite leicht unter. Man könnte die Menschheit auf der geringsten kleinen Insel des Pazifischen Ozeans zusammenpferchen.
Der kleine Prinz
Die großen Leute werden Euch das freilich nicht glauben. Sie bilden sich ein, viel Platz zu brauchen. Sie nehmen sich wichtig wie Affenbrotbäume. Gebt ihnen also den Rat, sich's auszurechnen. Sie beten die Zahlen an, das wird ihnen gefallen. Aber ihr sollt Eure Zeit nicht damit verlieren. Es ist zwecklos. Ihr habt Vertrauen zu mir.
Einmal auf der Erde, wunderte sich der kleine Prinz, niemanden zu sehen. Er fürchtete schon, sich im Planeten geirrt zu haben, als ein mondfarbener Ring sich im Sande bewegte.
»Gute Nacht«, sagte der kleine Prinz aufs Geratewohl.
»Gute Nacht«, sagte die Schlange.
»Auf welchen Planeten bin ich gefallen?« fragte der kleine Prinz.
»Auf die Erde, du bist in Afrika«, antwortete die Schlange.
»Ah! ... es ist also niemand auf der Erde?«
»Hier ist die Wüste. In den Wüsten ist niemand. Die Erde ist groß« sagte die Schlange.
Der kleine Prinz setzte sich auf einen Stein und hob die Augen zum Himmel.
»Ich frage mich«, sagte er, »ob die Sterne leuchten, damit jeder eines Tages den seinen wiederfinden kann. Schau meinen Planeten an. Er steht gerade über uns... Aber wie weit ist er fort!«
Der kleine Prinz
»Er ist schön«, sagte die Schlange. »Was willst Du hier machen?«
»Ich habe Schwierigkeiten mit einer Blume«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Ah!« sagte die Schlange.
Und sie schwiegen.
»Wo sind die Menschen?« fuhr der kleine Prinz endlich fort. »Man ist ein bißchen einsam in der Wüste...«
»Man ist auch bei den Menschen einsam«, sagte die Schlange.
Der kleine Prinz sah sie lange an.
»Du bist ein drolliges Tier«, sagte er schließlich, »dünn wie ein Finger...«
»Aber ich bin mächtiger als der Finger eines Königs«, sagte die Schlange.
Der kleine Prinz mußte lächeln.
»Du bist nicht sehr mächtig ... Du hast nicht einmal Füße ... Du kannst nicht einmal reisen ...«
»Ich kann Dich weiter bringen als ein Schiff«, sagte die Schlange. Sie rollte sich um den Knöchel des kleinen Prinzen wie ein goldenes Armband.
»Wen ich berühre, den gebe ich der Erde zurück, aus der er hervorgegangen ist«, sagte sie noch. »Aber Du bist rein, du kommst von einem Stern...«
Der keine Prinz antwortete nichts.
»Du tust mir leid auf dieser Erde aus Granit, du, der du so schwach bist. Ich kann dir eines Tages helfen, wenn Du dich zu sehr nach Deinem Planeten sehnst. Ich kann ...«
»Oh, ich habe sehr gut verstanden« sagte der kleine Prinz, »aber warum sprichst Du immer in Rätseln?«
»Ich löse sie alle«, sagte die Schlange. Und sie schwiegen.
XVIII
Der kleine Prinz durchquerte die Wüste und begegnete nur einer Blume mit drei Blütenblättern, einer ganz armseligen Blume...
»Guten Tag«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Guten Tag«, sagte die Blume.
»Wo sind die Menschen?« fragte höflich der kleine Prinz.
Die Blume hatte eines Tages eine Karawane vorüberziehen sehen.
»Die Menschen? Es gibt, glaube ich, sechs oder sieben. Ich habe sie vor Jahren gesehen. Aber man weiß nie, wo sie zu finden sind. Der Wind verweht sie. Es fehlen ihnen die Wurzeln, das ist sehr übel für sie.«
»Adieu«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Adieu«, sagte die Blume.
Der kleine Prinz
XIX
Der kleine Prinz stieg auf einen hohen Berg. Die einzigen Berge, die er kannte, waren die drei Vulkane, und sie reichten nur bis an die Knie, und den erloschenen Vulkan benutze er als Schemel.
Von einem Berg so hoch wie der da, sagte er sich, werde ich mit einemmal den ganzen Planeten und alle Menschen sehen... Aber er sah nichts als die Nadeln spitziger Felsen.
»Guten Tag«, sagte er aufs Geratewohl.
»Guten Tag... Guten Tag... Guten Tag...«, antwortete das Echo.
»Wer bist Du?«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Wer bist Du... Wer bist Du... Wer bist Du...?«, antwortete das Echo.
Der kleine Prinz
»Seid meine Freunde, ich bin allein«, sagte er.
»Ich bin allein... allein... allein...«antwortete das Echo.
Was für ein merkwürdiger Planet! dachte er da. Er ist ganz trocken, voller Spitzen und ganz salzig. Und den Menschen fehlt es an Phantasie. Sie wiederholen, was man ihnen sagt... Zu Hause hatte ich eine Blume: Sie sprach immer zuerst...
XX
Aber nachdem der kleine Prinz lange über den Sand, die Felsen und den Schnee gewandert war, geschah es, daß er endlich eine Straße entdeckte. Und die Straßen führen zu Menschen.
»Guten Tag«, sagte er.
Da war ein blühender Rosengarten.
Der kleine Prinz
»Guten Tag«, sagten die Rosen.
Der kleine Prinz sah sie an. Sie glichen alle seiner Blume.
»Wer seid ihr?« fragte er sie höchst erstaunt.
»Wir sind Rosen«, sagten die Rosen.
»Ach!« sagte der kleine Prinz...
Und er fühlte sich sehr unglücklich. Seine Blume hatte ihm erzählt, daß sie auf der ganzen Welt einzig in ihrer Art sei. Und siehe!, da waren fünftausend davon, alle gleich, in einem einzigen Garten!
Sie wäre sehr böse, wenn sie das sähe, sagte er sich... Sie würde fürchterlich husten und so tun, als stürbe sie, um der Lächerlichkeit zu entgehen. Und ich müßte wohl so tun, als pflegte ich sie, denn sonst ließe ich sie wirklich sterben, um auch mich zu beschämen...
Dann sagte er sich noch: Ich glaubte, ich sei reich durch eine einzigartige Blume, und ich besitze nur eine gewöhnliche Rose. Sie und meine drei Vulkane, die mir bis ans Knie reichen und von denen einer vielleicht für immer verloschen ist, das macht aus mir keinen sehr großen Prinzen... Und er warf sich ins Gras und weinte.
Der kleine Prinz
XXI
In diesem Augenblick erschien der Fuchs:
»Guten Tag«, sagte der Fuchs.
»Guten Tag«, antwortete höflich der kleine Prinz, der sich umdrehte, aber nichts sah.
»Ich bin da«, sagte die Stimme, »unter dem Apfelbaum...«
»Wer bist du?« sagte der kleine Prinz. »Du bist sehr hübsch...«
»Ich bin ein Fuchs«, sagte der Fuchs.
»Komm und spiel mit mir«, schlug ihm der kleine Prinz vor. »Ich bin so traurig...«
»Ich kann nicht mit dir spielen«, sagte der Fuchs. »Ich bin noch nicht gezähmt!«
»Ah, Verzeihung!« sagte der kleine Prinz.
Der kleine Prinz
Aber nach einiger Überlegung fügte er hinzu:
»Was bedeutet das: 'zähmen'?«
»Du bist nicht von hier, sagte der Fuchs, »was suchst du?«
»Ich suche die Menschen«, sagte der kleine Prinz. »Was bedeutet 'zähmen'?«
»Die Menschen«, sagte der Fuchs, »die haben Gewehre und schießen. Das ist sehr lästig. Sie ziehen auch Hühner auf. Das ist ihr einziges Interesse. Du suchst Hühner?«
»Nein«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »ich suche Freunde. Was heißt 'zähmen'?«
»Das ist eine in Vergessenheit geratene Sache«, sagte der Fuchs. »Es bedeutet: sich 'vertraut machen'.«
»Vertraut machen?«
»Gewiß«, sagte der Fuchs. »Du bist für mich noch nichts als ein kleiner Knabe, der hunderttausend kleinen Knaben völlig gleicht. Ich brauche dich nicht, und du brauchst mich ebensowenig. Ich bin für dich nur ein Fuchs, der hunderttausend Füchsen gleicht. Aber wenn du mich zähmst, werden wir einander brauchen. Du wirst für mich einzig sein in der Welt. Ich werde für dich einzig sein in der Welt...«
»Ich beginne zu verstehen«, sagte der kleine Prinz. »Es gibt eine Blume... ich glaube, sie hat mich gezähmt...«
»Das ist möglich«, sagte der Fuchs. »Man trifft auf der Erde alle möglichen Dinge...«
»Oh, das ist nicht auf der Erde«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
Der Fuchs schien sehr aufgeregt:
»Auf einem anderen Planeten?«
»Ja.«
»Gibt es Jäger auf diesem Planeten?«
»Nein.«
»Das ist interessant! Und Hühner?«
»Nein.«
»Nichts ist vollkommen!« seufzte der Fuchs.
Aber der Fuchs kam auf seinen Gedanken zurück:
»Mein Leben ist eintönig. Ich jage Hühner, die Menschen jagen mich. Alle Hühner gleichen einander, und alle Menschen gleichen einander. Ich langweile mich also ein wenig. Aber wenn du mich zähmst, wird mein Leben wie durchsonnt sein. Ich werde den Klang deines Schrittes kennen, der sich von allen andern unterscheidet. Die anderen Schritte jagen mich unter die Erde. Der deine wird mich wie Musik aus dem Bau locken. Und dann schau! Du siehst da drüben die Weizenfelder? Ich esse kein Brot. Für mich ist der Weizen zwecklos. Die Weizenfelder erinnern mich an nichts. Und das ist traurig. Aber du hast weizenblondes Haar. Oh, es wird wunderbar sein, wenn du mich einmal gezähmt hast! Das Gold der Weizenfelder wird mich an dich erinnern. Und ich werde das Rauschen des Windes im Getreide liebgewinnen.«
Der Fuchs verstummte und schaute den Prinzen lange an:
»Bitte... zähme mich!« sagte er.
»Ich möchte wohl«, antwortete der kleine Prinz, »aber ich habe nicht viel Zeit. Ich muß Freunde finden und viele Dinge kennenlernen.«
»Man kennt nur die Dinge, die man zähmt«, sagte der Fuchs. »Die Menschen haben keine Zeit mehr, irgend etwas kennenzulernen. Sie kaufen sich alles fertig in den Geschäften. Aber da es keine Kaufläden für Freunde gibt, haben die Leute keine Freunde mehr. Wenn du einen Freund willst, so zähme mich!«
»Was muß ich da tun?« sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Du mußt sehr geduldig sein«, antwortete der Fuchs. »Du setzt dich zuerst ein wenig abseits von mir ins Gras. Ich werde dich so verstohlen, so aus dem Augenwinkel anschauen, und du wirst nichts sagen. Die Sprache ist die Quelle der Mißverständnisse. Aber jeden Tag wirst du dich ein bißchen näher setzen können...«
Am nächsten Morgen kam der kleine Prinz zurück.
Der kleine Prinz
»Es wäre besser gewesen, du wärst zur selben Stunde wiedergekommen«, sagte der Fuchs. »Wenn du zum Beispiel um vier Uhr nachmittags kommst, kann ich um drei Uhr anfangen, glücklich zu sein. Je mehr die Zeit vergeht, um so glücklicher werde ich mich fühlen. Um vier Uhr werde ich mich schon aufregen und beunruhigen; ich werde erfahre, wie teuer das Glück ist. Wenn du aber irgendwann kommst, kann ich nie wissen, wann mein Herz da sein soll... Es muß feste Bräuche geben.«
»Was heißt 'fester Brauch'?«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Auch etwas in Vergessenheit Geratenes«, sagte der Fuchs. »Es ist das, was einen Tag vom andern unterscheidet, eine Stunde von den andern Stunden. Es gibt zum Beispiel einen Brauch bei meinen Jägern. Sie tanzen am Donnerstag mit dem Mädchen des Dorfes. Daher ist der Donnerstag der wunderbare Tag. Ich gehe bis zum Weinberg spazieren. Wenn die Jäger irgendwann einmal zum Tanze gingen, wären die Tage alle gleich und ich hätte niemals Ferien.«
So machte denn der kleine Prinz den Fuchs mit sich vertraut. Und als die Stunde des Abschieds nahe war:
»Ach!« sagte der Fuchs, »ich werde weinen.«
»Das ist deine Schuld«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »ich wünschte dir nichts Übles, aber du hast gewollt, daß ich dich zähme...«
»Gewiß«, sagte der Fuchs.
»Aber nun wirst du weinen!« sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Bestimmt«, sagte der Fuchs.
»So hast du nichts gewonnen!«
»Ich habe«, sagte der Fuchs, »die Farbe des Weizens gewonnen.«
Dann fügte er hinzu:
»Geh die Rosen wieder anschauen. Du wirst begreifen, daß die deine einzig ist in der Welt.
Der kleine Prinz
Du wirst wiederkommen und mir adieu sagen, und ich werde dir ein Geheimnis schenken.«
Der kleine Prinz ging, die Rosen wiederzusehn:
»Ihr gleicht meiner Rose gar nicht, ihr seid noch nichts«, sagte er zu ihnen. »Niemand hat sich euch vertraut gemacht und auch ihr habt euch niemandem vertraut gemacht. Ihr seid, wie mein Fuchs war. Der war nichts als ein Fuchs wie hunderttausend andere. Aber ich habe ihn zu meinem Freund gemacht, und jetzt ist er einzig in der Welt.«
Und die Rosen waren sehr beschämt.
»Ihr seid schön, aber ihr sein leer«, sagte er noch. »Man kann für euch nicht sterben. Gewiß, ein Irgendwer, der vorübergeht, könnte glauben, meine Rose ähnle euch. Aber in sich selbst ist sie wichtiger als ihr alle, da sie es ist, die ich begossen habe. Da sie es ist, die ich unter den Glassturz gestellt habe. Da sie es ist, die ich mit dem Wandschirm geschützt habe. Da sie es ist, deren Raupen ich getötet habe (außer den zwei oder drei um der Schmetterlinge willen). Da sie es ist, die ich klagen oder sich rühmen gehört habe oder auch manchmal schweigen. Da es meine Rose ist.«
Und er kam zum Fuchs zurück:
»Adieu«, sagte er...
»Adieu«, sagte der Fuchs. »Hier mein Geheimnis. Es ist ganz einfach: man sieht nur mit dem Herzen gut. Das Wesentliche ist für die Augen unsichtbar.«
»Das Wesentliche ist für die Augen unsichtbar«, wiederholte der kleine Prinz, um es sich zu merken.
»Die Menschen haben diese Wahrheit vergessen«, sagte der Fuchs. »Aber du darfst sie nicht vergessen. Du bist zeitlebens für das verantwortlich, was du dir vertraut gemacht hast. Du bist für deine Rose verantwortlich...«
»Ich bin für meine Rose verantwortlich...«, wiederholte der kleine Prinz, um es sich zu merken.
XXII
»Guten Tag«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Guten Tag«, sagte der Weichensteller.
»Was machst du da?« sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Ich sortiere die Reisenden nach Tausenderpaketen«, sagte der Weichensteller. »Ich schicke die Züge, die sie fortbringen, bald nach rechts, bald nach links.« Und ein lichterfunkelnder Schnellzug, grollend wie der Donner, machte das Weichenstellerhäuschen erzittern.
»Sie haben es sehr eilig«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »Wohin wollen sie?«
»Der Mann von der Lokomotive weiß es selbst nicht«, sagte der Weichensteller.
»Das wechselt.«
»Waren sie nicht zufrieden dort, wo sie waren?«
»Man ist nicht zufrieden dort, wo man ist«, sagte der Weichensteller.
Und es rollte der Donner eines dritten funkelnden Schnellzuges vorbei.
»Verfolgen diese die ersten Reisenden?«, fragte der kleine Prinz.
»Sie verfolgen gar nichts«, sagte der Weichensteller. »Sie schlafen da drinnen oder sie gähnen auch. Nur die Kinder drücken ihre Nasen gegen die Fensterscheiben.«
»Nur die Kinder wissen, wohin sie wollen«, sagte der kleine Prinz. »Sie wenden ihre Zeit an eine Puppe aus Stoff-Fetzen, und die Puppe wird ihnen sehr wertvoll, und wenn man sie ihnen wegnimmt, weinen sie ...«
»Sie haben es gut«, sagte der Weichensteller.
XXIII
»Guten Tag«, sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Guten Tag«, sagte der Händler.
Er handelte mit höchst wirksamen, durststillenden Pillen. Man schluckt jede Woche eine und spürt überhaupt kein Bedürfnis mehr, zu trinken.
»Warum verkaufst du das?« sagte der kleine Prinz.
»Das ist eine große Zeitersparnis«, sagte der Händler. »Die Sachverständigen haben Berechnungen angestellt. Man erspart dreiundfünfzig Minuten in der Woche.«
»Und was macht man mit diesen dreiundfünfzig Minuten?«
»Man macht damit, was man will ...«
»Wenn ich dreinundfünfzig Minuten übrig hätte", sagte der kleine Prinz, »würde ich ganz gemächlich zu einem Brunnen laufen ...«
Der kleine Prinz
XXIV
Es war am achten Tage nach meiner Panne in der Wüste und ich hörte gerade die Geschichte vom Pillenverkäufer, als ich den letzten Tropfen meines Wasservorrates trank:
»Ach«, sagte ich zum kleinen Prinzen, »deine Erinnerungen sind ganz hübsch, aber ich habe mein Flugzeug noch nicht repariert, habe nichts mehr zu trinken und wäre glücklich, wenn auch ich ganz gemächlich zu einem Brunnen gehen könnte!«
»Mein Freund, der Fuchs«, sagte er ...
»Mein kleines Kerlchen, es handelt sich nicht mehr um den Fuchs!«
»Warum?«
»Weil man vor Durst sterben wird ...«
Er verstand meinen Einwand nicht, er antwortete:
»Es ist gut einen Freund zu haben, selbst wenn man sterben muß. Ich bin froh, daß ich einen Fuchs zum Freunde hatte ...«
Er ermißt die Gefahr nicht, sagte ich mir. Er hat nie Hunger, nie Durst. Ein bißchen Sonne genügt ihm ...
Aber er sah mich an und antwortete auf meine Gedanken:
»Ich habe auch Durst ... suchen wir einen Brunnen ...«
Ich machte eine Gebärde der Hoffnungslosigkeit: es ist sinnlos auf gut Glück in der Endlosigkeit der Wüste einen Brunnen zu suchen. Dennoch machten wir uns auf den Weg.
Als wir stundenlang schweigend dahingezogen waren, brach die Nacht herein, und die Sterne begannen zu leuchten. Ich sah sie wie im Traum, ich hatte ein wenig Fieber vor Durst. Die Worte des kleinen Prinzen tanzten durch mein Bewußtsein:
»Du hast also auch Durst?« fragte ich ihn.
Er antwortete nicht auf meine Frage. Er sagte einfach:
»Wasser kann auch gut sein für das Herz ...«
Ich verstand seine Worte nicht, aber ich schwieg ... Ich wußte gut, daß man ihn nicht fragen durfte.
Er war müde. Er setzte sich. Ich setzte mich neben ihn. Und nach einem Schweigen sagte er noch:
»Die Sterne sind schön, weil sie an eine Blume erinnern, die man nicht sieht ...«
Ich antwortete: »Gewiß«, und betrachtete schweigend die Falten des Sandes unter dem Monde.
»Die Wüste ist schön, fügte er hinzu ...«
Und das war wahr. Ich die Wüste immer geliebt. Man setzt sich auf eine Sanddüne. Man sieht nichts. Man hört nichts. Und währenddessen strahlt etwas in der Stille.
»Es macht die Wüste schön«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »daß sie irgendwo einen Brunnen birgt.«
Ich war überrascht, dieses geheimnisvolle Leuchten des Sandes plötzlich zu verstehen. Als ich ein kleiner Knabe war, wohnte ich in einem alten Haus, und die Sage erzählte, daß darin ein Schatz versteckt sei. Gewiß, es hat ihn nie jemand gesucht. Aber er verzauberte dieses ganze Haus. Mein Haus barg ein Geheimnis auf dem Grunde seines Herzens ...
»Ja«, sagte ich zum kleinen Prinzen, »ob es sich um das Haus, um die Sterne oder um die Wüste handelt, was ihre Schönheit ausmacht, ist unsichtbar!«
»Ich bin froh«, sagte er, »daß du mit meinem Fuchs übereinstimmst.«
Da der kleine Prinz einschlief, nahm ich ihn in meine Arme und machte mich wieder auf den Weg. Ich war bewegt. Mir war, als trüge ich ein zerbrechliches Kleinod. Es schien mir sogar, als gäbe es nichts Zerbrechlicheres auf der Erde. Ich betrachtete im Mondlicht diese blasse Stirn, diese geschlossenen Augen, diese im Winde zitternde Haarsträhne, und ich sagte mir: Was ich da sehe, ist nur eine Hülle. Das Eigentliche ist unsichtbar ...
Da seine halbgeöffneten Lippen ein halbes Lächeln andeuteten, dachte ich mir auch: Was mich an diesem kleinen eingeschlafenen Prinzen so sehr rührt, ist seine Treue zu seiner Blume, ist das Bild einer Rose, das ihn durchstrahlt wie die Flamme einer Lampe, selbst wenn er schläft ... Und er kam mir noch zerbrechlicher vor als bisher. Man muß die Lampen sorgsam schützen: ein Windstoß kann sie zum Verlöschen bringen ...
Und während ich so weiterging, entdeckte ich bei Tagesanbruch den Brunnen.
XXV
»Die Leute«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »schieben sich in die Schnellzüge, aber sie wissen gar nicht, wohin sie fahren wollen. Nachher regen sie sich auf und drehen sich im Kreis ...«
Und er fügte hinzu:
»Das ist nicht der Mühe wert ...«
Der Brunnen, den wir erreicht hatten, glich nicht den Brunnen der Sahara. Die Brunnen der Sahara sind einfache, in den Sand gegrabene Löcher. Dieser da glich einem Dorfbrunnen. Aber es war keinerlei Dorf da, und ich glaubte zu träumen.
»Das ist merkwürdig«, sagte ich zum kleinen Prinzen, »alles ist bereit: die Winde, der Kübel und das Seil ...«
Er lachte, berührte das Seil, ließ die Rolle spielen. Und die Rolle knarrte wie ein altes Windrad, wenn der Wind lange geschlafen hat.
»Du hörst«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »wir wecken diesen Brunnen auf, und er singt ...«
Ich wollte nicht, daß er sich abmühte:
»Laß mich das machen«, sagte ich zu ihm, »das ist zu schwer für dich.«
Langsam hob ich den Kübel bis zum Brunnenrand. Ich stellte ihn dort schön aufrecht. In meinen Ohren war noch immer der Gesang der Zugwinde, und im Wasser, das noch zitterte, sah ich die Sonne zittern.
»Ich habe Durst nach diesem Wasser«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »gib mir zu trinken ...«
Und ich verstand, was er gesucht hatte.
Ich hob den Kübel an seine Lippen. Er trank mit geschlossenen Augen. Das war süß wie ein Fest. Dieses Wasser war etwas ganz anderes als ein Trunk. Es war entsprungen aus dem Marsch unter den Sternen, aus dem Gesang der Rolle, aus der Mühe meiner Arme. Es war gut fürs Herz, wie ein Geschenk. Genau so machten, als ich ein Knabe war, die Lichter des Christbaums, die Musik der Weihnachtsmette, die Sanftmut des Lächelns den eigentlichen Glanz der Geschenke aus, die ich erhielt.
»Die Menschen bei dir zu Hause«, sagte der kleine Prinz, »züchten fünftausend Rosen in ein und demselben Garten ...und doch finden sie dort nicht, was sie suchen ...«
»Sie finden es nicht«, antwortete ich ...
»Und dabei kann man das, was sie suchen, in einer einzigen Rose oder in ein bißchen Wasser finden ...«
»Ganz gewiß«, antwortete ich.
Der kleine Prinz
Und der kleine Prinz fügte hinzu:
»Aber die Augen sind blind. Man muß mit dem Herzen suchen.«
Ich hatte getrunken. Es atmete sich wieder gut. Der Sand hat bei Tagesanbruch die Farbe des Honigs. Auch über diese Honigfarbe war ich glücklich. Warum mußte ich Kummer haben ...
»Du mußt dein Versprechen halten«, sagte sanft der kleine Prinz, der sich wieder zu mir gesetzt hatte.
»Welches Versprechen?«
»Du weißt, einen Maulkorb für mein Schaf ...Ich bin verantwortlich für diese Blume!«
Ich nahm meine Skizzen aus der Tasche. Der kleine Prinz sah sie und sagte lachend:
»Deine Affenbrotbäume schauen ein bißchen wie Kohlköpfe aus ...«
»Oh!«
Und ich war auf die Affenbrotbäume so stolz gewesen!
»Dein Fuchs ...seine Ohren ...sie schauen ein wenig wie Hörner aus ...sie sind viel zu lang!«
Und er lachte wieder.
»Du bist ungerecht, kleines Kerlchen, ich konnte nichts zeichnen als geschlossene und offene Riesenschlangen!«
»Oh! Es wird schon gehn«, sagte er, »die Kinder wissen ja Bescheid.«
Ich kritzelte also einen Maulkorb hin. Und das Herz krampfte sich mir zusammen, als ich ihn dem kleinen Prinzen gab:
»Du hast Pläne, von denen ich nichts weiß ...«
Aber er antwortete nicht. Er sagte:
»Du weißt, mein Sturz auf die Erde ...Morgen wird es ein Jahr sein ...«
Dann, nach einem Schweigen, sagte er noch:
»Ich war ganz in der Nähe heruntergefallen ...«
Und er errötete.
Wieder fühlte ich einen merkwürdigen Kummer, ohne zu wissen, warum. Indessen kam mir eine Frage:
»Dann ist es kein Zufall, daß du am Morgen, da ich dich kennenlernte, vor acht Tagen, so ganz allein, tausend Meilen von allen bewohnten Gegenden entfernt, spazierengingst! Du kehrtest zu dem Punkt zurück, wohin du gefallen warst?«
Der kleine Prinz errötete noch mehr.
Und ich fügte zögernd hinzu:
»Vielleicht war es der Jahrestag? ...«
Von neuem errötete der kleine Prinz. Er antwortete nie auf die Fragen, aber wenn man errötet, so bedeutet das ,ja', nicht wahr?
»Ach«, sagte ich, »ich habe Angst!«
Aber er antwortete:
»Du mußt jetzt arbeiten. Du mußt wieder zu deiner Maschine zurückkehren. Ich erwarte dich hier. Komm morgen abend wieder ...«
Aber ich war nicht beruhigt. Ich erinnerte mich an den Fuchs. Man läuft Gefahr, ein bißchen zu weinen, wenn man sich hat zähmen lassen ...
XXVI
Neben dem Brunnen stand die Ruine einer alten Steinmauer. Als ich am nächsten Abend von meiner Arbeit zurückkam, sah ich von weitem meinen kleinen Prinzen da oben sitzen, mit herabhängenden Beinen. Und ich hörte ihn sprechen.
»Du erinnerst dich also nicht mehr?« sagte er. »Es ist nicht ganz genau hier!«
Zweifellos antwortete ihm eine andere Stimme, da er erwiderte:
»Doch! Doch! Es ist wohl der Tag, aber nicht ganz genau der Ort ...«
Ich setzte meinen Weg zur Mauer fort. Ich sah und hörte niemanden. Dennoch erwiderte der kleine Prinz von neuem:
»Gewiß. Du wirst sehen, wo meine Spur im Sand beginnt. Du brauchst mich nur dort zu erwarten. Ich werde heute nacht dort sein.«
Ich war zwanzig Meter von der Mauer entfernt und sah noch immer nichts. Der kleine Prinz sagte noch, nach einem kurzen Schweigen:
»Du hast gutes Gift? Bist Du sicher, daß du mich nicht lange leiden läßt?«
Ich blieb stehen, und das Herz preßte sich mir zusammen, aber ich verstand noch immer nicht.
»Jetzt geh weg«, sagte er, »ich will hinunterspringen!
Da richtete ich selbst den Blick auf den Fuß der Mauer, und ich machte einen Satz! Da war, zum kleinen Prinzen emporgereckt, eine dieser gelben Schlangen, die euch in dreißig Sekunden erledigen ... Ich wühlte in meiner Tasche nach meinem Revolver und begann zu laufen, aber bei dem Lärm, den ich machte, ließ sich die Schlange sachte in den Sand gleiten, wie ein Wasserstrahl, der stirbt, und ohne allzu große Eile schlüpfte sie mit einem leichten metallenen Klirren zwischen die Steine.
Gerade rechtzeitig kam ich zur Mauer, um mein kleines Kerlchen von einem Prinzen in meinen Armen aufzufangen; er war bleich wie der Schnee.
»Was sind das für Geschichten! Du sprichst jetzt mit Schlangen?!«
Ich hatte ihm sein ewiges gelbes Halstuch abgenommen. Ich hatte ihm die Schläfen genetzt und ihm zu trinken gegeben. Und jetzt wage ich nicht, ihn weiter zu fragen.
Er schaute mich ernsthaft an und legte seine Arme um meinen Hals. Ich fühlte sein Herz klopfen wie das eines sterbenden Vogels, den man mit der Flinte geschossen hat.
Er sagte zu mir:
»Ich bin froh, daß du gefunden hast, was an deiner Maschine fehlte. Du wirst nach Hause zurückkehren können ...«
»Woher weißt du das?«
Der kleine Prinz
Ich hatte ihm gerade erzählen wollen, daß mir gegen alle Erwartungen meine Arbeit geglückt sei!
Er antwortete nicht auf meine Frage, fuhr aber fort:
»Auch ich werde heute nach Hause zurückkehren ...«
Dann schwermütig:
»Das ist viel weiter ...Das ist viel schwieriger ...«
Ich fühle wohl, daß etwas Außergewöhnliches vorging.
Ich schloß ihn fest in die Arme wie ein kleines Kind, und doch schien es mir, als stürzte er senkrecht in einen Abgrund, ohne daß ich imstande war, ihn zurückzuhalten ...
Sein Blick war ernst; er verlor sich in weiter Ferne:
»Ich habe dein Schaf. Und ich habe die Kiste für das Schaf. Und ich habe den Maulkorb ...«
Und er lächelte schwermütig.
Ich wartete lange. Ich fühlte, daß er sich mehr und mehr erwärmte:
»Kleines Kerlchen, du hast Angst gehabt ...«
Er hatte Angst gehabt, ganz gewiß! Aber er lachte sanft:
»Ich werde heute abend noch viel mehr Angst haben ...«
Wieder lief es mir eisig über den Rücken bei dem Gefühl des Unabwendbaren. Dieses Lachen nie mehr zu hören - ich begriff, daß ich den Gedanken nicht ertrug. Es war für mich wie ein Brunnen in der Wüste.
»Kleines Kerlchen, ich will dich noch mehr lachen hören ...«
Aber er sagte zu mir:
»Diese Nacht wird es ein Jahr. Mein Stern wird sich gerade über dem Ort befinden, wo ich letztes Jahr gelandet bin ...«
»Kleines Kerlchen, ist sie nicht ein böser Traum, diese Geschichte mit der Schlange und der Vereinbarung und dem Stern ...«
Aber er antwortete nicht auf meine Frage.
Der kleine Prinz
Er sagte: »Was wichtig ist, sieht man nicht ...«
»Gewiß ...«
»Das ist wie mit der Blume. Wenn du eine Blume liebst, die auf einem Stern wohnt, so ist es süß, bei Nacht den Himmel zu betrachten. Alle Sterne sind voll Blumen.«
»Gewiß ...«
»Das ist wie mit dem Wasser. Was du mir zu trinken gabst, war wie Musik, die Winde und das Seil ...du erinnerst dich ...es war gut.«
»Gewiß ...«
»Du wirst in der Nacht die Sterne anschauen. Mein Zuhause ist zu klein, um dir zeigen zu können, wo es umgeht. Es ist besser so. Mein Stern wird für dich einer der Sterne sein. Dann wirst du alle Sterne gern anschauen ...Alle werden sie deine Freunde sein. Und dann werde ich dir ein Geschenk machen ...«
Er lachte noch.
»Ach! Kleines Kerlchen, kleines Kerlchen! Ich höre dieses Lachen so gern!«
»Gerade das wird mein Geschenk sein ...Es wird sein wie mit dem Wasser ...«
»Was willst du sagen?«
»Die Leute haben Sterne, aber es sind nicht die gleichen. Für die einen, die reisen, sind die Sterne Führer. Für andere sind sie nichts als kleine Lichter. Für wieder andere, die Gelehrten, sind sie Probleme. Für meinen Geschäftsmann waren sie Gold. Aber alle diese Sterne schweigen. Du, du wirst Sterne haben, wie sie niemand hat ...«
»Was willst du sagen?«
»Wenn du bei Nacht den Himmel anschaust, wird es dir sein, als lachten alle Sterne, weil ich auf einem von ihnen wohne, weil ich auf einem von ihnen lache. Du allein wirst Sterne haben, die lachen können!«
Der kleine Prinz
Und er lachte wieder.
»Und wenn du dich getröstet hast (man tröstet sich immer), wirst du froh sein, mich gekannt zu haben. Du wirst immer mein Freund sein. Du wirst Lust haben, mit mir zu lachen. Und du wirst manchmal dein Fenster öffnen, gerade so, zum Vergnügen ...Und deine Freunde werden sehr erstaunt sein, wenn sie sehen, daß du den Himmel anblickst und lachst. Dann wirst du ihnen sagen: 'Ja, die Sterne, die bringen mich immer zum Lachen!' und sie werden dich für verrückt halten. Ich werde dir einen hübschen Streich gespielt haben ...«
Und er lachte wieder.
»Es wird sein, als hätte ich dir statt der Sterne eine Menge kleiner Schellen geschenkt, die lachen können ...«
Und er lachte noch immer. Dann wurde er wieder ernst:
»Diese Nacht ...weißt du ...komm nicht!«
»Ich werde dich nicht verlassen.«
Aber er war voll Sorge.
»Ich sage dir das ...auch wegen der Schlange. Sie darf dich nicht beißen ... Die Schlangen sind böse. Sie können zum Vergnügen beißen ...«
»Ich werde dich nicht verlassen.«
Aber etwas beruhigte ihn:
»Es ist wahr, sie haben für den zweiten Biß kein Gift mehr ...«
Ich habe es nicht gesehen, wie er sich in der Nacht auf den Weg machte. Er war lautlos entwischt. Als es mir gelang, ihn einzuholen, marschierte er mit raschem, entschlossenem Schritt dahin.
Er sagte nur:
»Ah, du bist da ...«
Und er nahm mich bei der Hand. Aber er quälte sich noch:
»Du hast recht getan. Es wird dir Schmerz bereiten. Es wird aussehen, als wäre ich tot, und das wird nicht wahr sein ...«
Ich schwieg.
»Du verstehst. Es ist zu weit. Ich kann diesen Leib da nicht mitnehmen. Er ist zu schwer.«
Ich schwieg.
»Aber er wird daliegen wie eine alte verlassene Hülle. Man soll nicht traurig sein um solche alten Hüllen ...«
Ich schwieg.
Er verlor ein bißchen den Mut. Aber er gab sich noch Mühe:
»Weißt du, es wird allerliebst sein. Auch ich werde die Sterne anschauen. Alle Sterne werden Brunnen sein mit einer verrosteten Winde. Alle Sterne werden mir zu trinken geben ...«
Ich schwieg.
»Das wird so lustig sein! Du wirst fünfhundert Millionen Schellen haben, ich werde fünfhundert Brunnen haben ...«
Und auch er schwieg, weil er weinte ...
Der kleine Prinz
»Da ist es. Laß mich einen Schritt ganz allein tun.«
Und er setzte sich, weil er Angst hatte.
Er sagte noch:
»Du weißt ...meine Blume ...ich bin für sie verantwortlich! Und sie ist so schwach! Und sie ist so kindlich. Sie hat vier Dornen, die nicht taugen, sie gegen die Welt zu schützen ...«
Ich setzte mich, weil ich mich nicht mehr aufrecht halten konnte.
Er sagte:
»Hier ...Das ist alles ...«
Er zögerte noch ein bißchen, dann erhob er sich. Er tat einen Schritt. Ich konnte mich nicht rühren.
Es war nichts als ein gelber Blitz bei seinem Knöchel. Er blieb einen Augenblick reglos. Er schrie nicht. Er fiel sachte, wie ein Blatt fällt. Ohne das leiseste Geräusch fiel er in den Sand.
XXVII
Und jetzt sind es gewiß schon wieder sechs Jahre her ... Ich habe diese Geschichte noch nie erzählt. Die Kameraden, die mich wiedergesehen haben, waren froh, mich lebend wiederzusehen. Ich war traurig, aber ich sagte zu ihnen: Das ist die Erschöpfung ...
Jetzt habe ich mich ein bißchen getröstet. Das heißt ... Nicht ganz. Aber ich weiß gut, er ist auf seinen Planeten zurückgekehrt, denn bei Tagesanbruch habe ich seinen Körper nicht wiedergefunden. Es war kein so schwerer Körper ... Und ich liebe es, des Nachts den Sternen zuzuhören. Sie sind wie fünfhundert Millionen Glöckchen ...
Aber nun geschieht etwas Außergewöhnliches.
Ich habe vergessen, an den Maulkorb, den ich für den kleinen Prinzen gezeichnet habe, einen Lederriemen zu machen! Es wird ihm nie gelungen sein, ihn dem Schaf anzulegen.
So frage ich mich: Was hat sich auf dem Planeten wohl ereignet? Vielleicht hat das Schaf doch die Blume gefressen ...
Das eine Mal sage ich mir: Bestimmt nicht! Der kleine Prinz deckt seine Blume jede Nacht mit seinem Glassturz zu, und er gibt auf sein Schaf acht. Dann bin ich glücklich. Und alle Sterne lachen leise.
Dann wieder sage ich mir: Man ist das eine oder das andere Mal zerstreut, und das genügt! Er hat eines Abends die Glasglocke vergessen, oder das Schaf ist eines Nachts lautlos entwichen ... Dann verwandeln sich die Schellen alle in Tränen! ...
Das ist ein sehr großes Geheimnis. Für euch, die ihr den kleinen Prinzen auch liebt, wie für mich, kann nichts auf der Welt unberührt bleiben, wenn irgendwo, man weiß nicht wo, ein Schaf, das wir nicht kennen, eine Rose vielleicht gefressen hat, oder vielleicht nicht gefressen hat ...
Schaut den Himmel an. Fragt euch: Hat das Schaf die Blume gefressen oder nicht? Ja oder nein? Und ihr werdet sehen, wie sich alles verwandelt ...
Aber keiner von den großen Leuten wird jemals verstehn, daß das eine so große Bedeutung hat!
Der kleine Prinz
Das ist für mich die schönste und traurigste Landschaft der Welt. Es ist die gleiche wie auf der vorletzten Seite, aber ich habe sie nochmals hergezeichnet, um sie Euch ganz deutlich zu machen. Hier ist der kleine Prinz auf der Erde erschienen und wieder verschwunden.




El Principito
Kategorie Malý princ
11. Březen 2008
A LEON WERTH
Pido perdón a los niños por haber dedicado este libro a una persona mayor. Tengo una seria excusa: esta persona mayor es el mejor amigo que tengo en el mundo. Pero tengo otra excusa: esta persona mayor es capaz de comprenderlo todo, incluso los libros para niños. Tengo una tercera excusa todavía: esta persona mayor vive en Francia, donde pasa hambre y frío. Tiene, por consiguiente, una gran necesidad de ser consolada. Si no fueran suficientes todas esas razones, quiero entonces dedicar este libro al niño que fue hace tiempo esta persona mayor. Todas las personas mayores antes han sido niños. (Pero pocas de ellas lo recuerdan). Corrijo, por consiguiente, mi dedicatoria:
A LEON WERTH,
cuando era niño.
I
Cuando yo tenía seis años vi en un libro sobre la selva virgen que se titulaba "Historias vividas", una magnífica lámina. Representaba una serpiente boa que se tragaba a una fiera. Esta es la copia del dibujo.
El Principito
En el libro se afirmaba: "La serpiente boa se traga su presa entera, sin masticarla. Luego ya no puede moverse y duerme durante los seis meses que dura su digestión".
Reflexioné mucho en ese momento sobre las aventuras de la jungla y a mi vez logré trazar con un lápiz de colores mi primer dibujo. Mi dibujo número uno era de esta manera:
El Principito
Enseñé mi obra de arte a las personas mayores y les pregunté si mi dibujo les daba miedo.
-¿por qué habría de asustar un sombrero? - me respondieron.
Mi dibujo no representaba un sombrero. Representaba una serpiente boa que digiere un elefante. Dibujé entonces el interior de la serpiente boa a fin de que las personas mayores pudieran comprender. Siempre estas personas tienen necesidad de explicaciones. Mi dibujo número dos era así:
El Principito
Las personas mayores me aconsejaron abandonar el dibujo de serpientes boas, ya fueran abiertas o cerradas, y poner más interés en la geografía, la historia, el cálculo y la gramática. De esta manera a la edad de seis años abandoné una magnífica carrera de pintor. Había quedado desilusionado por el fracaso de mis dibujos número uno y número dos. Las personas mayores nunca pueden comprender algo por sí solas y es muy aburrido para los niños tener que darles una y otra vez explicaciones.
Tuve, pues, que elegir otro oficio y aprendí a pilotar aviones. He volado un poco por todo el mundo y la geografía, en efecto, me ha servido de mucho; al primer vistazo podía distinguir perfectamente la China de Arizona. Esto es muy útil, sobre todo si se pierde uno durante la noche.
A lo largo de mi vida he tenido multitud de contactos con multitud de gente seria. Viví mucho con personas mayores y las he conocido muy de cerca; pero esto no ha mejorado demasiado mi opinión sobre ellas.
Cuando me he encontrado con alguien que me parecía un poco lúcido, lo he sometido a la experiencia de mi dibujo número uno que he conservado siempre. Quería saber si verdaderamente era un ser comprensivo. E invariablemente me contestaban siempre: "Es un sombrero". Me abstenía de hablarles de la serpiente boa, de la selva virgen y de las estrellas. Poniéndome a su altura, les hablaba del bridge, del golf, de política y de corbatas. Y mi interlocutor se quedaba muy contento de conocer a un hombre tan razonable.
II
Viví así, solo, nadie con quien poder hablar verdaderamente, hasta cuando hace seis años tuve una avería en el desierto de Sahara. Algo se había estropeado en el motor. Como no llevaba conmigo ni mecánico ni pasajero alguno, me dispuse a realizar, yo solo, una reparación difícil. Era para mí una cuestión de vida o muerte, pues apenas tenía agua de beber para ocho días.
La primera noche me dormí sobre la arena, a unas mil millas de distancia del lugar habitado más próximo. Estaba más aislado que un náufrago en una balsa en medio del océano. Imaginaos, pues, mi sorpresa cuando al amanecer me despertó una extraña vocecita que decía:
- ¡Por favor... píntame un cordero!
-¿Eh?
-¡Píntame un cordero!
Me puse en pie de un salto como herido por el rayo. Me froté los ojos. Miré a mi alrededor. Vi a un extraordinario hombrecito que me miraba gravemente. Ahí tenéis el mejor retrato que más tarde logré hacer de él, aunque mi dibujo, ciertamente es menos encantador que el modelo. Pero no es mía la culpa. Las personas mayores me desanimaron de mi carrera de pintor a la edad de seis años y no había aprendido a dibujar otra cosa que boas cerradas y boas abiertas.
El Principito
Miré, pues, aquella aparición con los ojos redondos de admiración. No hay que olvidar que me encontraba a unas mil millas de distancia del lugar habitado más próximo. Y ahora bien, el hombrecito no me parecía ni perdido, ni muerto de cansancio, de hambre, de sed o de miedo. No tenía en absoluto la apariencia de un niño perdido en el desierto, a mil millas de distancia del lugar habitado más próximo. Cuando logré, por fin, articular palabra, le dije:
- Pero… ¿qué haces tú por aquí?
Y él respondió entonces, suavemente, como algo muy importante:
-¡Por favor… píntame un cordero!
Cuando el misterio es demasiado impresionante, es imposible desobedecer. Por absurdo que aquello me pareciera, a mil millas de distancia de todo lugar habitado y en peligro de muerte, saqué de mi bolsillo una hoja de papel y una estilográfica. Recordé que yo había estudiado especialmente geografía, historia, cálculo y gramática y le dije al hombrecito (ya un poco malhumorado), que no sabía dibujar.
- No importa - me respondió-, píntame un cordero!
Como nunca había dibujado un cordero, rehice para él uno de los dos únicos dibujos que yo era capaz de realizar: el de la serpiente boa cerrada. Y quedé estupefacto cuando oí decir al hombrecito:
- ¡No, no! Yo no quiero un elefante en una serpiente. La serpiente es muy peligrosa y el elefante ocupa mucho sitio. En mi tierra es todo muy pequeño. Necesito un cordero. Píntame un cordero.
Dibujé un cordero. Lo miró atentamente y dijo:
El Principito
-¡No! Este está ya muy enfermo. Haz otro.
Volví a dibujar.
El Principito
Mi amigo sonrió dulcemente, con indulgencia.
-¿Ves? Esto no es un cordero, es un carnero. Tiene Cuernos…
Rehice nuevamente mi dibujo: fue rechazado igual que los anteriores.
El Principito
-Este es demasiado viejo. Quiero un cordero que viva mucho tiempo.
Falto ya de paciencia y deseoso de comenzar a desmontar el motor, garabateé rápidamente este dibujo, se lo enseñé, y le agregué:
El Principito
-Esta es la caja. El cordero que quieres está dentro. Con gran sorpresa mía el rostro de mi joven juez se iluminó:
-¡Así es como yo lo quería! ¿Crees que sea necesaria mucha hierba para este cordero?
-¿Por qué?
-Porque en mi tierra es todo tan pequeño…
Se inclinó hacia el dibujo y exclamó:
-¡Bueno, no tan pequeño…! Está dormido…
Y así fue como conocí al principito.
III
El Principito
Me costó mucho tiempo comprender de dónde venía. El principito, que me hacía muchas preguntas, jamás parecía oír las mías. Fueron palabras pronunciadas al azar, las que poco a poco me revelaron todo. Así, cuando distinguió por vez primera mi avión (no dibujaré mi avión, por tratarse de un dibujo demasiado complicado para mí) me preguntó:
-¿Qué cosa es esa? -Eso no es una cosa. Eso vuela. Es un avión, mi avión.
Me sentía orgulloso al decirle que volaba. El entonces gritó:
-¡Cómo! ¿Has caído del cielo? -Sí -le dije modestamente. -¡Ah, que curioso!
Y el principito lanzó una graciosa carcajada que me irritó mucho. Me gusta que mis desgracias se tomen en serio. Y añadió:
-Entonces ¿tú también vienes del cielo? ¿De qué planeta eres tú?
Divisé una luz en el misterio de su presencia y le pregunté bruscamente:
-¿Tu vienes, pues, de otro planeta?
Pero no me respondió; movía lentamente la cabeza mirando detenidamente mi avión.
-Es cierto, que, encima de eso, no puedes venir de muy lejos…
Y se hundió en un ensueño durante largo tiempo. Luego sacando de su bolsillo mi cordero se abismó en la contemplación de su tesoro.
Imagináos cómo me intrigó esta semiconfidencia sobre los otros planetas. Me esforcé, pues, en saber algo más:
-¿De dónde vienes, muchachito? ¿Dónde está "tu casa"? ¿Dónde quieres llevarte mi cordero?
Después de meditar silenciosamente me respondió:
-Lo bueno de la caja que me has dado es que por la noche le servirá de casa. -Sin duda. Y si eres bueno te daré también una cuerda y una estaca para atarlo durante el día.
Esta proposición pareció chocar al principito.
-¿Atarlo? ¡Qué idea más rara! -Si no lo atas, se irá quién sabe dónde y se perderá…
Mi amigo soltó una nueva carcajada.
-¿Y dónde quieres que vaya? -No sé, a cualquier parte. Derecho camino adelante…
Entonces el principito señaló con gravedad:
-¡No importa, es tan pequeña mi tierra!
Y agregó, quizás, con un poco de melancolía:
-Derecho, camino adelante… no se puede ir muy lejos.
IV
El Principito
De esta manera supe una segunda cosa muy importante: su planeta de origen era apenas más grande que una casa.
Esto no podía asombrarme mucho. Sabía muy bien que aparte de los grandes planetas como la Tierra, Júpiter, Marte, Venus, a los cuales se les ha dado nombre, existen otros centenares de ellos tan pequeños a veces, que es difícil distinguirlos aun con la ayuda del telescopio. Cuando un astrónomo descubre uno de estos planetas, le da por nombre un número. Le llama, por ejemplo, "el asteroide 3251".
El Principito
Tengo poderosas razones para creer que el planeta del cual venía el principito era el asteroide B 612. Este asteroide ha sido visto sólo una vez con el telescopio en 1909, por un astrónomo turco.
El Principito
Este astrónomo hizo una gran demostración de su descubrimiento en un congreso Internacional de Astronomía. Pero nadie le creyó a causa de su manera de vestir. Las personas mayores son así. Felizmente para la reputación del asteroide B 612, un dictador turco impuso a su pueblo, bajo pena de muerte, el vestido a la europea. Entonces el astrónomo volvió a dar cuenta de su descubrimiento en 1920 y como lucía un traje muy elegante, todo el mundo aceptó su demostración.
El Principito
Si os he contado todos estos detalles sobre el asteroide B 612 y hasta os he confiado su número, es por consideración a las personas mayores. A los mayores les gustan las cifras. Cuando se les habla de un nuevo amigo, jamás preguntan sobre lo esencial del mismo. Nunca se les ocurre preguntar: "¿Qué tono tiene su voz? ¿Qué juegos prefiere? ¿Le gusta coleccionar mariposas?" Pero en cambio preguntan: "¿Qué edad tiene? ¿Cuántos hermanos? ¿Cuánto pesa? ¿Cuánto gana su padre?" Solamente con estos detalles creen conocerle. Si les decimos a las personas mayores: "He visto una casa preciosa de ladrillo rosa, con geranios en las ventanas y palomas en el tejado", jamás llegarán a imaginarse cómo es esa casa. Es preciso decirles: "He visto una casa que vale cien mil francos". Entonces exclaman entusiasmados: "¡Oh, qué preciosa es!"
De tal manera, si les decimos: "La prueba de que el principito ha existido está en que era un muchachito encantador, que reía y quería un cordero. Querer un cordero es prueba de que se existe", las personas mayores se encogerán de hombros y nos dirán que somos unos niños. Pero si les decimos: "el planeta de donde venía el principito era el asteroide B 612", quedarán convencidas y no se preocuparán de hacer más preguntas. Son así. No hay por qué guardarles rencor. Los niños deben ser muy indulgentes con las personas mayores.
Pero nosotros, que sabemos comprender la vida, nos burlamos tranquilamente de los números. A mí me habría gustado más comenzar esta historia a la manera de los cuentos de hadas. Me habría gustado decir:
"Era una vez un principito que habitaba un planeta apenas más grande que él y que tenía necesidad de un amigo…" Para aquellos que comprenden la vida, esto hubiera parecido más real.
Porque no me gusta que mi libro sea tomado a la ligera. Siento tanta pena al contar estos recuerdos. Hace ya seis años que mi amigo se fue con su cordero. Y si intento describirlo aquí es sólo con el fin de no olvidarlo. Es muy triste olvidar a un amigo. No todos han tenido un amigo. Y yo puedo llegar a ser como las personas mayores, que sólo se interesan por las cifras. Para evitar esto he comprado una caja de lápices de colores. ¡Es muy duro, a mi edad, ponerse a aprender a dibujar, cuando en toda la vida no se ha hecho otra tentativa que la de una boa abierta y una boa cerrada a la edad de seis años! Ciertamente que yo trataré de hacer retratos lo más parecido posibles, pero no estoy muy seguro de lograrlo. Uno saldrá bien y otro no tiene parecido alguno. En las proporciones me equivoco también un poco. Aquí el principito es demasiado grande y allá es demasiado pequeño. Dudo también sobre el color de su traje. Titubeo sobre esto y lo otro y unas veces sale bien y otras mal. Es posible, en fin, que me equivoque sobre ciertos detalles muy importantes. Pero habrá que perdonármelo ya que mi amigo no me daba nunca muchas explicaciones. Me creía semejante a sí mismo y yo, desgraciadamente, no sé ver un cordero a través de una caja. Es posible que yo sea un poco como las personas mayores. He debido envejecer.
V
Cada día yo aprendía algo nuevo sobre el planeta, sobre la partida y sobre el viaje. Esto venía suavemente al azar de las reflexiones. De esta manera tuve conocimiento al tercer día , del drama de los baobabs.
Fue también gracias al cordero y como preocupado por una profunda duda, cuando el principito me preguntó:
-¿Es verdad que los corderos se comen los arbustos?
-Sí, es cierto.
-¡Ah, qué contesto estoy!
No comprendí por qué era tan importante para él que los corderos se comieran los arbustos. Pero el principito añadió:
-Entonces se comen también los Baobabs.
Le hice comprender al principito que los baobabs no son arbustos, sino árboles tan grandes como iglesias y que incluso si llevase consigo todo un rebaño de elefantes, el rebaño no lograría acabar con un solo baobab.
Esta idea del rebaño de elefantes hizo reír al principito.
-Habría que poner los elefantes unos sobre otros…
El Principito
Y luego añadió juiciosamente:
-Los baobabs, antes de crecer, son muy pequeñitos.
-Es cierto. Pero ¿por qué quieres que tus corderos coman los baobabs?
Me contestó: "¡Bueno! ¡Vamos!" como si hablara de una evidencia. Me fue necesario un gran esfuerzo de inteligencia para comprender por mí mismo este problema.
En efecto, en el planeta del principito había, como en todos los planetas, hierbas buenas y hierbas malas. Por consiguiente, de buenas semillas salían buenas hierbas y de las semillas malas, hierbas malas. Pero las semillas son invisibles; duermen en el secreto de la tierra, hasta que un buen día una de ellas tiene la fantasía de despertarse. Entonces se alarga extendiendo hacia el sol, primero tímidamente, una encantadora ramita inofensiva. Si se trata de una ramita de rábano o de rosal, se la puede dejar que crezca como quiera. Pero si se trata de una mala hierba, es preciso arrancarla inmediatamente en cuanto uno ha sabido reconocerla. En el planeta del principito había semillas terribles… como las semillas del baobab. El suelo del planeta está infestado de ellas. Si un baobab no se arranca a tiempo, no hay manera de desembarazarse de él más tarde; cubre todo el planeta y lo perfora con sus raíces. Y si el planeta es demasiado pequeño y los baobabs son numerosos, lo hacen estallar.
"Es una cuestión de disciplina, me decía más tarde el principito. Cuando por la mañana uno termina de arreglarse, hay que hacer cuidadosamente la limpieza del planeta. Hay que dedicarse regularmente a arrancar los baobabs, cuando se les distingue de los rosales, a los cuales se parecen mucho cuando son pequeñitos. Es un trabajo muy fastidioso pero muy fácil".
El Principito
Y un día me aconsejó que me dedicara a realizar un hermoso dibujo, que hiciera comprender a los niños de la tierra estas ideas. "Si alguna vez viajan, me decía, esto podrá servirles mucho. A veces no hay inconveniente en dejar para más tarde el trabajo que se ha de hacer; pero tratándose de baobabs, el retraso es siempre una catástrofe. Yo he conocido un planeta, habitado por un perezoso que descuidó tres arbustos…"
El Principito
Siguiendo las indicaciones del principito, dibujé dicho planeta. Aunque no me gusta el papel de moralista, el peligro de los baobabs es tan desconocido y los peligros que puede correr quien llegue a perderse en un asteroide son tan grandes, que no vacilo en hacer una excepción y exclamar: "¡Niños, atención a los baobabs!" Y sólo con el fin de advertir a mis amigos de estos peligros a que se exponen desde hace ya tiempo sin saberlo, es por lo que trabajé y puse tanto empeño en realizar este dibujo. La lección que con él podía dar, valía la pena. Es muy posible que alguien me pregunte por qué no hay en este libro otros dibujos tan grandiosos como el dibujo de los baobabs. La respuesta es muy sencilla: he tratado de hacerlos, pero no lo he logrado. Cuando dibujé los baobabs estaba animado por un sentimiento de urgencia.
VI
El Principito
¡Ah, principito, cómo he ido comprendiendo lentamente tu vida melancólica! Durante mucho tiempo tu única distracción fue la suavidad de las puestas de sol. Este nuevo detalle lo supe al cuarto día, cuando me dijiste:
-Me gustan mucho las puestas de sol; vamos a ver una puesta de sol…
-Tendremos que esperar…
-¿Esperar qué?
-Que el sol se ponga.
Pareciste muy sorprendido primero, y después te reíste de ti mismo. Y me dijiste:
-Siempre me creo que estoy en mi tierra.
En efecto, como todo el mundo sabe, cuando es mediodía en Estados Unidos, en Francia se está poniendo el sol. Sería suficiente poder trasladarse a Francia en un minuto para asistir a la puesta del sol, pero desgraciadamente Francia está demasiado lejos. En cambio, sobre tu pequeño planeta te bastaba arrastrar la silla algunos pasos para presenciar el crepúsculo cada vez que lo deseabas…
-¡Un día vi ponerse el sol cuarenta y tres veces!
Y un poco más tarde añadiste:
-¿Sabes? Cuando uno está verdaderamente triste le gusta ver las puestas de sol.
-El día que la viste cuarenta y tres veces estabas muy triste ¿verdad?
Pero el principito no respondió.
VII
Al quinto día y también en relación con el cordero, me fue revelado este otro secreto de la vida del principito. Me preguntó bruscamente y sin preámbulo, como resultado de un problema largamente meditado en silencio:
-Si un cordero se come los arbustos, se comerá también las flores ¿no?
-Un cordero se come todo lo que encuentra.
-¿Y también las flores que tienen espinas?
-Sí; también las flores que tienen espinas.
-Entonces, ¿para qué le sirven las espinas?
Confieso que no lo sabía. Estaba yo muy ocupado tratando de destornillar un bulón demasiado apretado del motor; la avería comenzaba a parecerme cosa grave y la circunstancia de que se estuviera agotando mi provisión de agua, me hacía temer lo peor.
-¿Para qué sirven las espinas?
El principito no permitía nunca que se dejara sin respuesta una pregunta formulada por él. Irritado por la resistencia que me oponía el bulón, le respondí lo primero que se me ocurrió:
-Las espinas no sirven para nada; son pura maldad de las flores.
-¡Oh!
Y después de un silencio, me dijo con una especie de rencor:
-¡No te creo! Las flores son débiles. Son ingenuas. Se defienden como pueden. Se creen terribles con sus espinas…
No le respondí nada; en aquel momento me estaba diciendo a mí mismo: "Si este bulón me resiste un poco más, lo haré saltar de un martillazo". El principito me interrumpió de nuevo mis pensamientos:
-¿Tú crees que las flores…?
-¡No, no creo nada! Te he respondido cualquier cosa para que te calles. Tengo que ocuparme de cosas serias.
Me miró estupefacto.
-¡De cosas serias!
Me miraba con mi martillo en la mano, los dedos llenos de grasa e inclinado sobre algo que le parecía muy feo.
-¡Hablas como las personas mayores!
Me avergonzó un poco. Pero él, implacable, añadió:
-¡Lo confundes todo…todo lo mezclas…!
Estaba verdaderamente irritado; sacudía la cabeza, agitando al viento sus cabellos dorados.
-Conozco un planeta donde vive un señor muy colorado, que nunca ha olido una flor, ni ha mirado una estrella y que jamás ha querido a nadie. En toda su vida no ha hecho más que sumas. Y todo el día se lo pasa repitiendo como tú: "¡Yo soy un hombre serio, yo soy un hombre serio!"… Al parecer esto le llema de orgullo. Pero eso no es un hombre, ¡es un hongo!
-¿Un qué?
-Un hongo.
El principito estaba pálido de cólera.
-Hace millones de años que las flores tiene espinas y hace también millones de años que los corderos, a pesar de las espinas, se comen las flores. ¿Es que no es cosa seria averiguar por qué las flores pierden el tiempo fabricando unas espinas que no les sirven para nada? ¿Es que no es importante la guerra de los corderos y las flores? ¿No es esto más serio e importante que las sumas de un señor gordo y colorado? Y si yo sé de una flor única en el mundo y que no existe en ninguna parte más que en mi planeta; si yo sé que un buen día un corderillo puede aniquilarla sin darse cuenta de ello, ¿es que esto no es importante?
El principito enrojeció y después continuó:
-Si alguien ama a una flor de la que sólo existe un ejemplar en millones y millones de estrellas, basta que las mire para ser dichoso. Puede decir satisfecho: "Mi flor está allí, en alguna parte…" ¡Pero si el cordero se la come, para él es como si de pronto todas las estrellas se apagaran! ¡Y esto no es importante!
El Principito
No pudo decir más y estalló bruscamente en sollozos.
La noche había caído. Yo había soltado las herramientas y ya no importaban nada el martillo, el bulón, la sed y la muerte. ¡Había en una estrella, en un planeta, el mío, la Tierra, un principito a quien consolar! Lo tomé en mis brazos y lo mecí diciéndole: "la flor que tú quieres no corre peligro… te dibujaré un bozal para tu cordero y una armadura para la flor…te…". No sabía qué decirle, cómo consolarle y hacer que tuviera nuevamente confianza en mí; me sentía torpe. ¡Es tan misterioso el país de las lágrimas!
VIII
Aprendí bien pronto a conocer mejor esta flor. Siempre había habido en el planeta del principito flores muy simples adornadas con una sola fila de pétalos que apenas ocupaban sitio y a nadie molestaban. Aparecían entre la hierba una mañana y por la tarde se extinguían. Pero aquella había germinado un día de una semilla llegada de quién sabe dónde, y el principito había vigilado cuidadosamente desde el primer día aquella ramita tan diferente de las que él conocía. Podía ser una nueva especie de Baobab. Pero el arbusto cesó pronto de crecer y comenzó a echar su flor. El principito observó el crecimiento de un enorme capullo y tenía le convencimiento de que habría de salir de allí una aparición milagrosa; pero la flor no acababa de preparar su belleza al abrigo de su envoltura verde. Elegía con cuidado sus colores, se vestía lentamente y se ajustaba uno a uno sus pétalos. No quería salir ya ajada como las amapolas; quería aparecer en todo el esplendor de su belleza. ¡Ah, era muy coqueta aquella flor! Su misteriosa preparación duraba días y días. Hasta que una mañana, precisamente al salir el sol se mostró espléndida.
El Principito
La flor, que había trabajado con tanta precisión, dijo bostezando:
-¡Ah, perdóname… apenas acabo de despertarme… estoy toda despeinada…!
El principito no pudo contener su admiración:
-¡Qué hermosa eres!
-¿Verdad? -respondió dulcemente la flor-. He nacido al mismo tiempo que el sol. El principito adivinó exactamente que ella no era muy modesta ciertamente, pero ¡era tan conmovedora!
-Me parece que ya es hora de desayunar - añadió la flor -; si tuvieras la bondad de pensar un poco en mí...
Y el principito, muy confuso, habiendo ido a buscar una regadera la roció abundantemente con agua fresca.
El Principito
Y así, ella lo había atormentado con su vanidad un poco sombría. Un día, por ejemplo, hablando de sus cuatro espinas, dijo al principito:
-¡Ya pueden venir los tigres, con sus garras!
-No hay tigres en mi planeta -observó el principito- y, además, los tigres no comen hierba.
-Yo nos soy una hierba -respondió dulcemente la flor.
-Perdóname...
-No temo a los tigres, pero tengo miedo a las corrientes de aire. ¿No tendrás un biombo?
"Miedo a las corrientes de aire no es una suerte para una planta -pensó el principito-. Esta flor es demasiado complicada…"
-Por la noche me meterás bajo un globo… hace mucho frío en tu tierra. No se está muy a gusto; allá de donde yo vengo…
La flor se interrumpió; había llegado allí en forma de semilla y no era posible que conociera otros mundos. Humillada por haberse dejado sorprender inventando un mentira tan ingenua, tosió dos o tres veces para atraerse la simpatía del principito.
-¿Y el biombo?
-Iba a buscarlo, pero como no dejabas de hablarme…
Insistió en su tos para darle al menos remordimientos.
El Principito
De esta manera el principito, a pesar de la buena voluntad de su amor, había llegado a dudar de ella. Había tomado en serio palabras sin importancia y se sentía desgraciado.
"Yo no debía hacerle caso -me confesó un día el principito- nunca hay que hacer caso a las flores, basta con mirarlas y olerlas. Mi flor perfumaba mi planeta, pero yo no sabía gozar con eso… Aquella historia de garras y tigres que tanto me molestó, hubiera debido enternecerme".
El Principito
Y me contó todavía:
"¡No supe comprender nada entonces! Debí juzgarla por sus actos y no por sus palabras. ¡La flor perfumaba e iluminaba mi vida y jamás debí huir de allí! ¡No supe adivinar la ternura que ocultaban sus pobres astucias! ¡Son tan contradictorias las flores! Pero yo era demasiado joven para saber amarla".
El Principito
IX
Creo que el principito aprovechó la migración de una bandada de pájaros silvestres para su evasión. La mañana de la partida, puso en orden el planeta. Deshollinó cuidadosamente sus volcanes en actividad, de los cuales poseía dos, que le eran muy útiles para calentar el desayuno todas las mañanas. Tenía, además, un volcán extinguido. Deshollinó también el volcán extinguido, pues, como él decía, nunca se sabe lo que puede ocurrir. Si los volcanes están bien deshollinados, arden sus erupciones, lenta y regularmente. Las erupciones volcánicas son como el fuego de nuestras chimeneas. Es evidente que en nuestra Tierra no hay posibilidad de deshollinar los volcanes; los hombres somos demasiado pequeños. Por eso nos dan tantos disgustos.
El Principito
El principito arrancó también con un poco de melancolía los últimos brotes de baobabs. Creía que no iba a volver nunca. Pero todos aquellos trabajos le parecieron aquella mañana extremadamente dulces. Y cuando regó por última vez la flor y se dispuso a ponerla al abrigo del fanal, sintió ganas de llorar.
-Adiós -le dijo a la flor. Esta no respondió.
-Adiós -repitió el principito.
La flor tosió, pero no porque estuviera resfriada.
-He sido una tonta -le dijo al fin la flor-. Perdóname. Procura ser feliz.
Se sorprendió por la ausencia de reproches y quedó desconcertado, con el fanal en el aire, no comprendiendo esta tranquila mansedumbre.
-Sí, yo te quiero -le dijo la flor-, ha sido culpa mía que tú no lo sepas; pero eso no tiene importancia. Y tú has sido tan tonto como yo. Trata de ser feliz. . . Y suelta de una vez ese fanal; ya no lo quiero.
-Pero el viento...
-No estoy tan resfriada como para... El aire fresco de la noche me hará bien. Soy una flor.
-Y los animales...
-Será necesario que soporte dos o tres orugas, si quiero conocer las mariposas; creo que son muy hermosas. Si no ¿quién vendrá a visitarme? Tú estarás muy lejos. En cuanto a las fieras, no las temo: yo tengo mis garras.
Y le mostraba ingenuamente sus cuatro espinas. Luego añadió:
-Y no prolongues más tu despedida. Puesto que has decidido partir, vete de una vez.
La flor no quería que la viese llorar : era tan orgullosa...
X
Se encontraba en la región de los asteroides 325, 326, 327, 328, 329 y 330. Para ocuparse en algo e instruirse al mismo tiempo decidió visitarlos.
El primero estaba habitado por un rey. El rey, vestido de púrpura y armiño, estaba sentado sobre un trono muy sencillo y, sin embargo, majestuoso.
-¡Ah, -exclamó el rey al divisar al principito-, aquí tenemos un súbdito!
El principito se preguntó:
"¿Cómo es posible que me reconozca si nunca me ha visto?"
Ignoraba que para los reyes el mundo está muy simplificado. Todos los hombres son súbditos.
-Aproxímate para que te vea mejor -le dijo el rey, que estaba orgulloso de ser por fin el rey de alguien. El principito buscó donde sentarse, pero el planeta estaba ocupado totalmente por el magnífico manto de armiño. Se quedó, pues, de pie, pero como estaba cansado, bostezó.
-La etiqueta no permite bostezar en presencia del rey -le dijo el monarca-. Te lo prohíbo.
-No he podido evitarlo -respondió el principito muy confuso-, he hecho un viaje muy largo y apenas he dormido...
-Entonces -le dijo el rey- te ordeno que bosteces. Hace años que no veo bostezar a nadie. Los bostezos son para mí algo curioso. ¡Vamos, bosteza otra vez, te lo ordeno!
-Me da vergüenza... ya no tengo ganas... -dijo el principito enrojeciendo.
-¡Hum, hum! -respondió el rey-. ¡Bueno! Te ordeno tan pronto que bosteces y que no bosteces...
El Principito
Tartamudeaba un poco y parecía vejado, pues el rey daba gran importancia a que su autoridad fuese respetada. Era un monarca absoluto, pero como era muy bueno, daba siempre órdenes razonables.
Si yo ordenara -decía frecuentemente-, si yo ordenara a un general que se transformara en ave marina y el general no me obedeciese, la culpa no sería del general, sino mía".
-¿Puedo sentarme? -preguntó tímidamente el principito.
-Te ordeno sentarte -le respondió el rey-, recogiendo majestuosamente un faldón de su manto de armiño.
El principito estaba sorprendido. Aquel planeta era tan pequeño que no se explicaba sobre quién podría reinar aquel rey.
-Señor -le dijo-, perdóneme si le pregunto...
-Te ordeno que me preguntes -se apresuró a decir el rey.
-Señor. . . ¿sobre qué ejerce su poder?
-Sobre todo -contestó el rey con gran ingenuidad.
-¿Sobre todo?
El rey, con un gesto sencillo, señaló su planeta, los otros planetas y las estrellas.
-¿Sobre todo eso? -volvió a preguntar el principito.
-Sobre todo eso. . . -respondió el rey.
No era sólo un monarca absoluto, era, además, un monarca universal.
-¿Y las estrellas le obedecen?
-¡Naturalmente! -le dijo el rey-. Y obedecen en seguida, pues yo no tolero la indisciplina.
Un poder semejante dejó maravillado al principito. Si él disfrutara de un poder de tal naturaleza, hubiese podido asistir en el mismo día, no a cuarenta y tres, sino a setenta y dos, a cien, o incluso a doscientas puestas de sol, sin tener necesidad de arrastrar su silla. Y como se sentía un poco triste al recordar su pequeño planeta abandonado, se atrevió a solicitar una gracia al rey:
-Me gustaría ver una puesta de sol... Deme ese gusto... Ordénele al sol que se ponga...
-Si yo le diera a un general la orden de volar de flor en flor como una mariposa, o de escribir una tragedia, o de transformarse en ave marina y el general no ejecutase la orden recibida ¿de quién sería la culpa, mía o de él?
-La culpa sería de usted -le dijo el principito con firmeza.
-Exactamente. Sólo hay que pedir a cada uno, lo que cada uno puede dar -continuó el rey. La autoridad se apoya antes que nada en la razón. Si ordenas a tu pueblo que se tire al mar, el pueblo hará la revolución. Yo tengo derecho a exigir obediencia, porque mis órdenes son razonables.
-¿Entonces mi puesta de sol? -recordó el principito, que jamás olvidaba su pregunta una vez que la había formulado.
-Tendrás tu puesta de sol. La exigiré. Pero, según me dicta mi ciencia gobernante, esperaré que las condiciones sean favorables.
-¿Y cuándo será eso?
-¡Ejem, ejem! -le respondió el rey, consultando previamente un enorme calendario-, ¡ejem, ejem! será hacia... hacia... será hacia las siete cuarenta. Ya verás cómo se me obedece.
El principito bostezó. Lamentaba su puesta de sol frustrada y además se estaba aburriendo ya un poco.
-Ya no tengo nada que hacer aquí -le dijo al rey-. Me voy.
-No partas -le respondió el rey que se sentía muy orgulloso de tener un súbdito-, no te vayas y te hago ministro.
-¿Ministro de qué?
-¡De... de justicia!
-¡Pero si aquí no hay nadie a quien juzgar!
-Eso no se sabe -le dijo el rey-. Nunca he recorrido todo mi reino. Estoy muy viejo y el caminar me cansa. Y como no hay sitio para una carroza...
-¡Oh! Pero yo ya he visto. . . -dijo el principito que se inclinó para echar una ojeada al otro lado del planeta-. Allá abajo no hay nadie tampoco. .
-Te juzgarás a ti mismo -le respondió el rey-. Es lo más difícil. Es mucho más difícil juzgarse a sí mismo, que juzgar a los otros. Si consigues juzgarte rectamente es que eres un verdadero sabio.
-Yo puedo juzgarme a mí mismo en cualquier parte y no tengo necesidad de vivir aquí.
-¡Ejem, ejem! Creo -dijo el rey- que en alguna parte del planeta vive una rata vieja; yo la oigo por la noche. Tu podrás juzgar a esta rata vieja. La condenarás a muerte de vez en cuando. Su vida dependería de tu justicia y la indultarás en cada juicio para conservarla, ya que no hay más que una.
-A mí no me gusta condenar a muerte a nadie -dijo el principito-. Creo que me voy a marchar.
-No -dijo el rey.
Pero el principito, que habiendo terminado ya sus preparativos no quiso disgustar al viejo monarca, dijo:
-Si Vuestra Majestad deseara ser obedecido puntualmente, podría dar una orden razonable. Podría ordenarme, por ejemplo, partir antes de un minuto. Me parece que las condiciones son favorables...
Como el rey no respondiera nada, el principito vaciló primero y con un suspiro emprendió la marcha.
-¡Te nombro mi embajador! -se apresuró a gritar el rey. Tenía un aspecto de gran autoridad.
"Las personas mayores son muy extrañas", se decía el principito para sí mismo durante el viaje.
XI
El segundo planeta estaba habitado por un vanidoso:
-¡Ah! ¡Ah! ¡Un admirador viene a visitarme! -Gritó el vanidoso al divisar a lo lejos al principito.
Para los vanidosos todos los demás hombres son admiradores.
El Principito
-¡Buenos días! -dijo el principito-. ¡Qué sombrero tan raro tiene!
-Es para saludar a los que me aclaman -respondió el vanidoso. Desgraciadamente nunca pasa nadie por aquí.
-¿Ah, sí? -preguntó sin comprender el principito.
-Golpea tus manos una contra otra -le aconsejó el vanidoso.
El principito aplaudió y el vanidoso le saludó modestamente levantando el sombrero.
"Esto parece más divertido que la visita al rey", se dijo para sí el principito, que continuó aplaudiendo mientras el vanidoso volvía a saludarle quitándose el sombrero.
A los cinco minutos el principito se cansó con la monotonía de aquel juego.
-¿Qué hay que hacer para que el sombrero se caiga? -preguntó el principito.
Pero el vanidoso no le oyó. Los vanidosos sólo oyen las alabanzas.
-¿Tú me admiras mucho, verdad? -preguntó el vanidoso al principito.
-¿Qué significa admirar?
-Admirar significa reconocer que yo soy el hombre más bello, el mejor vestido, el más rico y el más inteligente del planeta.
-¡Si tú estás solo en tu planeta!
-¡Hazme ese favor, admírame de todas maneras!
-¡Bueno! Te admiro -dijo el principito encogiéndose de hombros-, pero ¿para qué te sirve?
Y el principito se marchó.
"Decididamente, las personas mayores son muy extrañas", se decía para sí el principito durante su viaje.
XII
El planeta siguiente estaba habitado por un bebedor. Fue una visita muy corta, pues hundió al principito en una gran melancolía.
El Principito
-¿Qué haces ahí? -preguntó al bebedor que estaba sentado en silencio ante un sinnúmero de botellas vacías y otras tantas botellas llenas.
-¡Bebo! -respondió el bebedor con tono lúgubre.
-¿Por qué bebes? -volvió a preguntar el principito.
-Para olvidar.
-¿Para olvidar qué? -inquirió el principito ya compadecido.
-Para olvidar que siento vergüenza -confesó el bebedor bajando la cabeza.
-¿Vergüenza de qué? -se informó el principito deseoso de ayudarle.
-¡Vergüenza de beber! -concluyó el bebedor, que se encerró nueva y definitivamente en el silencio.
Y el principito, perplejo, se marchó.
"No hay la menor duda de que las personas mayores son muy extrañas", seguía diciéndose para sí el principito durante su viaje.
XIII
El cuarto planeta estaba ocupado por un hombre de negocios. Este hombre estaba tan abstraído que ni siquiera levantó la cabeza a la llegada del principito.
-¡Buenos días! -le dijo éste-. Su cigarro se ha apagado.
El Principito
-Tres y dos cinco. Cinco y siete doce. Doce y tres quince. ¡Buenos días! Quince y siete veintidós. Veintidós y seis veintiocho. No tengo tiempo de encenderlo. Veintiocho y tres treinta y uno. ¡Uf! Esto suma quinientos un millones seiscientos veintidós mil setecientos treinta y uno.
-¿Quinientos millones de qué?
-¿Eh? ¿Estás ahí todavía? Quinientos millones de... ya no sé... ¡He trabajado tanto! ¡Yo soy un hombre serio y no me entretengo en tonterías! Dos y cinco siete...
-¿Quinientos millones de qué? -volvió a preguntar el principito, que nunca en su vida había renunciado a una pregunta una vez que la había formulado.
El hombre de negocios levantó la cabeza:
-Desde hace cincuenta y cuatro años que habito este planeta, sólo me han molestado tres veces. La primera, hace veintidós años, fue por un abejorro que había caído aquí de Dios sabe dónde. Hacía un ruido insoportable y me hizo cometer cuatro errores en una suma. La segunda vez por una crisis de reumatismo, hace once años. Yo no hago ningún ejercicio, pues no tengo tiempo de callejear. Soy un hombre serio. Y la tercera vez... ¡la tercera vez es ésta! Decía, pues, quinientos un millones...
-¿Millones de qué?
El hombre de negocios comprendió que no tenía ninguna esperanza de que lo dejaran en paz.
-Millones de esas pequeñas cosas que algunas veces se ven en el cielo.
-¿Moscas?
-¡No, cositas que brillan!
-¿Abejas?
-No. Unas cositas doradas que hacen desvariar a los holgazanes. ¡Yo soy un hombre serio y no tengo tiempo de desvariar!
-¡Ah! ¿Estrellas?
-Eso es. Estrellas.
-¿Y qué haces tú con quinientos millones de estrellas?
-Quinientos un millones seiscientos veintidós mil setecientos treinta y uno. Yo soy un hombre serio y exacto.
-¿Y qué haces con esas estrellas? -¿Que qué hago con ellas?
-Sí.
-Nada. Las poseo.
-¿Que las estrellas son tuyas?
-Sí.
-Yo he visto un rey que...
-Los reyes no poseen nada... Reinan. Es muy diferente.
-¿Y de qué te sirve poseer las estrellas?
-Me sirve para ser rico.
-¿Y de qué te sirve ser rico?
-Me sirve para comprar más estrellas si alguien las descubre.
"Este, se dijo a sí mismo el principito, razona poco más o menos como mi borracho".
No obstante le siguió preguntando :
-¿Y cómo es posible poseer estrellas?
-¿De quién son las estrellas? -contestó punzante el hombre de negocios.
-No sé. . . De nadie.
-Entonces son mías, puesto que he sido el primero a quien se le ha ocurrido la idea.
-¿Y eso basta?
-Naturalmente. Si te encuentras un diamante que nadie reclama, el diamante es tuyo. Si encontraras una isla que a nadie pertenece, la isla es tuya. Si eres el primero en tener una idea y la haces patentar, nadie puede aprovecharla: es tuya. Las estrellas son mías, puesto que nadie, antes que yo, ha pensado en poseerlas.
-Eso es verdad -dijo el principito- ¿y qué haces con ellas?
-Las administro. Las cuento y las recuento una y otra vez -contestó el hombre de negocios-. Es algo difícil. ¡Pero yo soy un hombre serio!
El principito no quedó del todo satisfecho.
-Si yo tengo una bufanda, puedo ponérmela al cuello y llevármela. Si soy dueño de una flor, puedo cortarla y llevármela también. ¡Pero tú no puedes llevarte las estrellas!
-Pero puedo colocarlas en un banco.
-¿Qué quiere decir eso?
-Quiere decir que escribo en un papel el número de estrellas que tengo y guardo bajo llave en un cajón ese papel.
-¿Y eso es todo?
-¡Es suficiente!
"Es divertido", pensó el principito. "Es incluso bastante poético. Pero no es muy serio".
El principito tenía sobre las cosas serias ideas muy diferentes de las ideas de las personas mayores.
-Yo -dijo aún- tengo una flor a la que riego todos los días; poseo tres volcanes a los que deshollino todas las semanas, pues también me ocupo del que está extinguido; nunca se sabe lo que puede ocurrir. Es útil, pues, para mis volcanes y para mi flor que yo las posea. Pero tú, tú no eres nada útil para las estrellas...
El hombre de negocios abrió la boca, pero no encontró respuesta.
El principito abandonó aquel planeta.
"Las personas mayores, decididamente, son extraordinarias", se decía a sí mismo con sencillez durante el viaje.
XIV
El quinto planeta era muy curioso. Era el más pequeño de todos, pues apenas cabían en él un farol y el farolero que lo habitaba. El principito no lograba explicarse para qué servirían allí, en el cielo, en un planeta sin casas y sin población un farol y un farolero. Sin embargo, se dijo a sí mismo:
"Este hombre, quizás, es absurdo. Sin embargo, es menos absurdo que el rey, el vanidoso, el hombre de negocios y el bebedor. Su trabajo, al menos, tiene sentido. Cuando enciende su farol, es igual que si hiciera nacer una estrella más o una flor y cuando lo apaga hace dormir a la flor o a la estrella. Es una ocupación muy bonita y por ser bonita es verdaderamente útil".
El Principito
Cuando llegó al planeta saludó respetuosamente al farolero:
-¡Buenos días! ¿Por qué acabas de apagar tu farol?
-Es la consigna -respondió el farolero-. ¡Buenos días!
-¿Y qué es la consigna?
-Apagar mi farol. ¡Buenas noches! Y encendió el farol.
-¿Y por qué acabas de volver a encenderlo?
-Es la consigna.
-No lo comprendo -dijo el principito.
-No hay nada que comprender -dijo el farolero-. La consigna es la consigna. ¡Buenos días!
Y apagó su farol.
Luego se enjugó la frente con un pañuelo de cuadros rojos.
-Mi trabajo es algo terrible. En otros tiempos era razonable; apagaba el farol por la mañana y lo encendía por la tarde. Tenía el resto del día para reposar y el resto de la noche para dormir.
-¿Y luego cambiaron la consigna?
-Ese es el drama, que la consigna no ha cambiado -dijo el farolero-. El planeta gira cada vez más de prisa de año en año y la consigna sigue siendo la misma.
-¿Y entonces? -dijo el principito.
-Como el planeta da ahora una vuelta completa cada minuto, yo no tengo un segundo de reposo. Enciendo y apago una vez por minuto.
-¡Eso es raro! ¡Los días sólo duran en tu tierra un minuto!
-Esto no tiene nada de divertido -dijo el farolero-. Hace ya un mes que tú y yo estamos hablando.
-¿Un mes?
-Sí, treinta minutos. ¡Treinta días! ¡Buenas noches!
Y volvió a encender su farol.
El principito lo miró y le gustó este farolero que tan fielmente cumplía la consigna. Recordó las puestas de sol que en otro tiempo iba a buscar arrastrando su silla. Quiso ayudarle a su amigo.
-¿Sabes? Yo conozco un medio para que descanses cuando quieras...
-Yo quiero descansar siempre -dijo el farolero.
Se puede ser a la vez fiel y perezoso.
El principito prosiguió:
-Tu planeta es tan pequeño que puedes darle la vuelta en tres zancadas. No tienes que hacer más que caminar muy lentamente para quedar siempre al sol. Cuando quieras descansar, caminarás... y el día durará tanto tiempo cuanto quieras.
-Con eso no adelanto gran cosa -dijo el farolero-, lo que a mí me gusta en la vida es dormir.
-No es una suerte -dijo el principito.
-No, no es una suerte -replicó el farolero-. ¡Buenos días!
Y apagó su farol.
Mientras el principito proseguía su viaje, se iba diciendo para sí: "Este sería despreciado por los otros, por el rey, por el vanidoso, por el bebedor, por el hombre de negocios. Y, sin embargo, es el único que no me parece ridículo, quizás porque se ocupa de otra cosa y no de sí mismo . Lanzó un suspiro de pena y continuó diciéndose:
"Es el único de quien pude haberme hecho amigo. Pero su planeta es demasiado pequeño y no hay lugar para dos... "
Lo que el principito no se atrevía a confesarse, era que la causa por la cual lamentaba no quedarse en este bendito planeta se debía a las mil cuatrocientas cuarenta puestas de sol que podría disfrutar cada veinticuatro horas.
XV
El sexto planeta era diez veces más grande. Estaba habitado por un anciano que escribía grandes libros.
-¡Anda, un explorador! -exclamó cuando divisó al principito.
El Principito
Este se sentó sobre la mesa y reposó un poco. ¡Había viajado ya tanto!
-¿De dónde vienes tú? -le preguntó el anciano.
-¿Qué libro es ese tan grande? -preguntó a su vez el principito-. ¿Qué hace usted aquí?
-Soy geógrafo -dijo el anciano.
-¿Y qué es un geógrafo?
-Es un sabio que sabe donde están los mares, los ríos, las ciudades, las montañas y los desiertos.
-Eso es muy interesante -dijo el principito-. ¡Y es un verdadero oficio!
Dirigió una mirada a su alrededor sobre el planeta del geógrafo; nunca había visto un planeta tan majestuoso.
-Es muy hermoso su planeta. ¿Hay océanos aquí?
-No puedo saberlo -dijo el geógrafo.
-¡Ah! (El principito se sintió decepcionado). ¿Y montañas?
-No puedo saberlo -repitió el geógrafo.
-¿Y ciudades, ríos y desiertos?
-Tampoco puedo saberlo.
-¡Pero usted es geógrafo!
-Exactamente -dijo el geógrafo-, pero no soy explorador, ni tengo exploradores que me informen. El geógrafo no puede estar de acá para allá contando las ciudades, los ríos, las montañas, los océanos y los desiertos; es demasiado importante para deambular por ahí. Se queda en su despacho y allí recibe a los exploradores. Les interroga y toma nota de sus informes. Si los informes de alguno de ellos le parecen interesantes, manda hacer una investigación sobre la moralidad del explorador.
-¿Para qué?
-Un explorador que mintiera sería una catástrofe para los libros de geografía. Y también lo sería un explorador que bebiera demasiado.
-¿Por qué? -preguntó el principito.
-Porque los borrachos ven doble y el geógrafo pondría dos montañas donde sólo habría una.
-Conozco a alguien -dijo el principito-, que sería un mal explorador.
-Es posible. Cuando se está convencido de que la moralidad del explorador es buena, se hace una investigación sobre su descubrimiento.
-¿ Se va a ver?
-No, eso sería demasiado complicado. Se exige al explorador que suministre pruebas. Por ejemplo, si se trata del descubrimiento de una gran montaña, se le pide que traiga grandes piedras.
Súbitamente el geógrafo se sintió emocionado:
-Pero... ¡tú vienes de muy lejos! ¡Tú eres un explorador! Vas a describirme tu planeta.
Y el geógrafo abriendo su registro afiló su lápiz. Los relatos de los exploradores se escriben primero con lápiz. Se espera que el explorador presente sus pruebas para pasarlos a tinta.
-¿Y bien? -interrogó el geógrafo.
-¡Oh! Mi tierra -dijo el principito- no es interesante, todo es muy pequeño. Tengo tres volcanes, dos en actividad y uno extinguido; pero nunca se sabe...
-No, nunca se sabe -dijo el geógrafo.
-Tengo también una flor.
-De las flores no tomamos nota.
-¿Por qué? ¡Son lo más bonito!
-Porque las flores son efímeras.
-¿Qué significa "efímera"?
-Las geografías -dijo el geógrafo- son los libros más preciados e interesantes; nunca pasan de moda. Es muy raro que una montaña cambie de sitio o que un océano quede sin agua. Los geógrafos escribimos sobre cosas eternas.
-Pero los volcanes extinguidos pueden despertarse -interrumpió el principito-. ¿Qué significa "efímera"?
-Que los volcanes estén o no en actividad es igual para nosotros. Lo interesante es la montaña que nunca cambia.
-Pero, ¿qué significa "efímera"? -repitió el principito que en su vida había renunciado a una pregunta una vez formulada.
-Significa que está amenazado de próxima desaparición.
-¿Mi flor está amenazada de desaparecer próximamente?
-Indudablemente.
"Mi flor as efímera -se dijo el principito- y no tiene más que cuatro espinas para defenderse contra el mundo. ¡Y la he dejado allá sola en mi casa!" Por primera vez se arrepintió de haber dejado su planeta, pero bien pronto recobró su valor.
-¿Qué me aconseja usted que visite ahora? -preguntó.
-La Tierra -le contestó el geógrafo-. Tiene muy buena reputación...
Y el principito partió pensando en su flor.
XVI
El séptimo planeta fue, por consiguiente, la Tierra.
¡La Tierra no es un planeta cualquiera! Se cuentan en él ciento once reyes (sin olvidar, naturalmente, los reyes negros) , siete mil geógrafos, novecientos mil hombres de negocios, siete millones y medio de borrachos, trescientos once millones de vanidosos, es decir, alrededor de dos mil millones de personas mayores.
Para darles una idea de las dimensiones de la Tierra yo les diría que antes de la invención de la electricidad había que mantener sobre el conjunto de los seis continentes un verdadero ejército de cuatrocientos sesenta y dos mil quinientos once faroleros.
Vistos desde lejos, hacían un espléndido efecto. Los movimientos de este ejército estaban regulados como los de un ballet de ópera. Primero venía el turno de los faroleros de Nueva Zelanda y de Australia. Encendían sus faroles y se iban a dormir. Después tocaba el turno en la danza a los faroleros de China y Siberia, que a su vez se escabullían entre los bastidores. Luego seguían los faroleros de Rusia y de las Indias, después los de África y Europa y finalmente, los de América del Sur y América del Norte. Nunca se equivocaban en su orden de entrada en escena. Era grandioso.
Solamente el farolero del único farol del Polo Norte y su colega del único farol del Polo Sur, llevaban una vida ociosa e indiferente: trabajaban dos veces por año.
XVII
Cuando se quiere ser ingenioso, sucede que se miente un poco. No he sido muy honesto al hablar de los faroleros y corro el riesgo de dar una falsa idea de nuestro planeta a los que no lo conocen. Los hombres ocupan muy poco lugar sobre la Tierra. Si los dos mil millones de habitantes que la pueblan se pusieran de pie y un poco apretados, como en un mitin, cabrían fácilmente en una plaza de veinte millas de largo por veinte de ancho. La humanidad podría amontonarse sobre el más pequeño islote del Pacífico.
Las personas mayores no les creerán, seguramente, pues siempre se imaginan que ocupan mucho sitio. Se creen importantes como los baobabs. Les dirán, pues, que hagan el cálculo; eso les gustará ya que adoran las cifras. Pero no es necesario que pierdan el tiempo inútilmente, puesto que tienen confianza en mí.
El principito, una vez que llegó a la Tierra, quedó sorprendido de no ver a nadie. Tenía miedo de haberse equivocado de planeta, cuando un anillo de color de luna se revolvió en la arena.
-¡Buenas noches! -dijo el principito.
-¡Buenas noches! -dijo la serpiente.
-¿Sobre qué planeta he caído? -preguntó el principito.
-Sobre la Tierra, en África -respondió la serpiente.
-¡Ah! ¿Y no hay nadie sobre la Tierra?
-Esto es el desierto. En los desiertos no hay nadie. La Tierra es muy grande -dijo la serpiente.
El principito se sentó en una piedra y elevó los ojos al cielo.
-Yo me pregunto -dijo- si las estrellas están encendidas para que cada cual pueda un día encontrar la suya. Mira mi planeta; está precisamente encima de nosotros... Pero... ¡qué lejos está!
El Principito
-Es muy bella -dijo la serpiente-. ¿Y qué vienes tú a hacer aquí?
-Tengo problemas con una flor -dijo el principito.
-¡Ah!
Y se callaron.
-¿Dónde están los hombres? -prosiguió por fin el principito. Se está un poco solo en el desierto...
-También se está solo donde los hombres -afirmó la serpiente.
El principito la miró largo rato y le dijo: -Eres un bicho raro, delgado como un dedo...
El Principito
-Pero soy más poderoso que el dedo de un rey -le interrumpió la serpiente.
El principito sonrió:
-No me pareces muy poderoso... ni siquiera tienes patas... ni tan siquiera puedes viajar...
-Puedo llevarte más lejos que un navío -dijo la serpiente.
Se enroscó alrededor del tobillo del principito como un brazalete de oro.
-Al que yo toco, le hago volver a la tierra de donde salió. Pero tú eres puro y vienes de una estrella...
El principito no respondió.
-Me das lástima, tan débil sobre esta tierra de granito. Si algún día echas mucho de menos tu planeta, puedo ayudarte. Puedo...
-¡Oh! -dijo el principito-. Te he comprendido. Pero ¿por qué hablas con enigmas?
-Yo los resuelvo todos -dijo la serpiente.
Y se callaron.
XVIII
El principito atravesó el desierto en el que sólo encontró una flor de tres pétalos, una flor de nada.
-¡Buenos días! -dijo el principito.
-¡Buenos días! -dijo la flor.
-¿Dónde están los hombres? -preguntó cortésmente el principito.
La flor, un día, había visto pasar una caravana.
-¿Los hombres? No existen más que seis o siete, me parece. Los he visto hace ya años y nunca se sabe dónde encontrarlos. El viento los pasea. Les faltan las raíces. Esto les molesta.
-Adiós -dijo el principito.
-Adiós -dijo la flor.
El Principito
XIX
El principito escaló hasta la cima de una alta montaña. Las únicas montañas que él había conocido eran los tres volcanes que le llegaban a la rodilla. El volcán extinguido lo utilizaba como taburete. "Desde una montaña tan alta como ésta, se había dicho, podré ver todo el planeta y a todos los hombres..." Pero no alcanzó a ver más que algunas puntas de rocas.
-¡Buenos días! -exclamó el principito al acaso.
-¡Buenos días! ¡Buenos días! ¡Buenos días! -respondió el eco.
-¿Quién eres tú? -preguntó el principito.
-¿Quién eres tú?... ¿Quién eres tú?... ¿Quién eres tú?... -contestó el eco.
-Sed mis amigos, estoy solo -dijo el principito.
-Estoy solo... estoy solo... estoy solo... -repitió el eco.
"¡Qué planeta más raro! -pensó entonces el principito-, es seco, puntiagudo y salado. Y los hombres carecen de imaginación; no hacen más que repetir lo que se les dice... En mi tierra tenía una flor: era siempre la primera en hablar... "
El Principito
XX
Pero sucedió que el principito, habiendo atravesado arenas, rocas y nieves, descubrió finalmente un camino. Y los caminos llevan siempre a la morada de los hombres.
El Principito
-¡Buenos días! -dijo.
Era un jardín cuajado de rosas.
-¡Buenos días! -dijeran las rosas.
El principito las miró. ¡Todas se parecían tanto a su flor!
-¿Quiénes sois? -les preguntó estupefacto.
-Somos las rosas -respondieron éstas.
-¡Ah! -exclamó el principito.
Y se sintió muy desgraciado. Su flor le había dicho que era la única de su especie en todo el universo. ¡Y ahora tenía ante sus ojos más de cinco mil, todas semejantes, en un solo jardín!
Si ella viese todo esto, se decía el principito, se sentiría vejada, tosería muchísimo y simularía morir para escapar al ridículo. Y yo tendría que fingirle cuidados, pues sería capaz de dejarse morir verdaderamente para humillarme a mí también... "
Y luego continuó diciéndose: "Me creía rico con una flor única y resulta que no tengo más que una rosa ordinaria. Eso y mis tres volcanes que apenas me llegan a la rodilla y uno de los cuales quizá esté extinguido para siempre. Realmente no soy un gran príncipe... " Y tendido sobre la hierba, el principito lloró.
El Principito
XXI
Entonces apareció el zorro:
-¡Buenos días! -dijo el zorro.
-¡Buenos días! -respondió cortésmente el principito que se volvió pero no vio nada.
-Estoy aquí, bajo el manzano -dijo la voz.
-¿Quién eres tú? -preguntó el principito-. ¡Qué bonito eres!
-Soy un zorro -dijo el zorro.
-Ven a jugar conmigo -le propuso el principito-, ¡estoy tan triste!
-No puedo jugar contigo -dijo el zorro-, no estoy domesticado.
-¡Ah, perdón! -dijo el principito.
El Principito
Pero después de una breve reflexión, añadió:
-¿Qué significa "domesticar"?
-Tú no eres de aquí -dijo el zorro- ¿qué buscas?
-Busco a los hombres -le respondió el principito-. ¿Qué significa "domesticar"?
-Los hombres -dijo el zorro- tienen escopetas y cazan. ¡Es muy molesto! Pero también crían gallinas. Es lo único que les interesa. ¿Tú buscas gallinas?
-No -dijo el principito-. Busco amigos. ¿Qué significa "domesticar"? -volvió a preguntar el principito.
-Es una cosa ya olvidada -dijo el zorro-, significa "crear vínculos... "
El Principito
-¿Crear vínculos?
-Efectivamente, verás -dijo el zorro-. Tú no eres para mí todavía más que un muchachito igual a otros cien mil muchachitos y no te necesito para nada. Tampoco tú tienes necesidad de mí y no soy para ti más que un zorro entre otros cien mil zorros semejantes. Pero si tú me domesticas, entonces tendremos necesidad el uno del otro. Tú serás para mí único en el mundo, yo seré para ti único en el mundo...
-Comienzo a comprender -dijo el principito-. Hay una flor... creo que ella me ha domesticado...
-Es posible -concedió el zorro-, en la Tierra se ven todo tipo de cosas.
-¡Oh, no es en la Tierra! -exclamó el principito.
El zorro pareció intrigado:
-¿En otro planeta?
-Sí.
-¿Hay cazadores en ese planeta?
-No.
-¡Qué interesante! ¿Y gallinas?
-No.
-Nada es perfecto -suspiró el zorro.
Y después volviendo a su idea:
-Mi vida es muy monótona. Cazo gallinas y los hombres me cazan a mí. Todas las gallinas se parecen y todos los hombres son iguales; por consiguiente me aburro un poco. Si tú me domesticas, mi vida estará llena de sol. Conoceré el rumor de unos pasos diferentes a todos los demás. Los otros pasos me hacen esconder bajo la tierra; los tuyos me llamarán fuera de la madriguera como una música. Y además, ¡mira! ¿Ves allá abajo los campos de trigo? Yo no como pan y por lo tanto el trigo es para mí algo inútil. Los campos de trigo no me recuerdan nada y eso me pone triste. ¡Pero tú tienes los cabellos dorados y será algo maravilloso cuando me domestiques! El trigo, que es dorado también, será un recuerdo de ti. Y amaré el ruido del viento en el trigo.
El zorro se calló y miró un buen rato al principito:
-Por favor... domestícame -le dijo.
-Bien quisiera -le respondió el principito pero no tengo mucho tiempo. He de buscar amigos y conocer muchas cosas.
-Sólo se conocen bien las cosas que se domestican -dijo el zorro-. Los hombres ya no tienen tiempo de conocer nada. Lo compran todo hecho en las tiendas. Y como no hay tiendas donde vendan amigos, los hombres no tienen ya amigos. ¡Si quieres un amigo, domestícame!
-¿Qué debo hacer? -preguntó el príncipito.
-Debes tener mucha paciencia -respondió el zorro-. Te sentarás al principio un poco lejos de mí, así, en el suelo; yo te miraré con el rabillo del ojo y tú no me dirás nada. El lenguaje es fuente de malos entendidos. Pero cada día podrás sentarte un poco más cerca...
El Principito
El principito volvió al día siguiente.
-Hubiera sido mejor -dijo el zorro- que vinieras a la misma hora. Si vienes, por ejemplo, a las cuatro de la tarde; desde las tres yo empezaría a ser dichoso. Cuanto más avance la hora, más feliz me sentiré. A las cuatro me sentiré agitado e inquieto; ¡descubriré así lo que vale la felicidad!. Pero si tú vienes a cualquier hora, nunca sabré cuándo preparar mi corazón... Los ritos son necesarios.
-¿Qué es un rito? -inquirió el principito.
-Es también algo demasiado olvidado -dijo el zorro-. Es lo que hace que un día no se parezca a otro día y que una hora sea diferente a otra. Entre los cazadores, por ejemplo, hay un rito. Los jueves bailan con las muchachas del pueblo. Los jueves entonces son días maravillosos en los que puedo ir de paseo hasta la viña. Si los cazadores no bailaran en día fijo, todos los días se parecerían y yo no tendría vacaciones.
De esta manera el principito domesticó al zorro. Y cuando se fue acercando el día de la partida:
-¡Ah! -dijo el zorro-, lloraré.
-Tuya es la culpa -le dijo el principito-, yo no quería hacerte daño, pero tú has querido que te domestique...
-Ciertamente -dijo el zorro.
- Y vas a llorar!, -dijo él principito.
-¡Seguro!
-No ganas nada.
-Gano -dijo el zorro- he ganado a causa del color del trigo.
Y luego añadió:
-Vete a ver las rosas; comprenderás que la tuya es única en el mundo. Volverás a decirme adiós y yo te regalaré un secreto.
El principito se fue a ver las rosas a las que dijo:
-No son nada, ni en nada se parecen a mi rosa. Nadie las ha domesticado ni ustedes han domesticado a nadie. Son como el zorro era antes, que en nada se diferenciaba de otros cien mil zorros. Pero yo le hice mi amigo y ahora es único en el mundo.
Las rosas se sentían molestas oyendo al principito, que continuó diciéndoles:
-Son muy bellas, pero están vacías y nadie daría la vida por ustedes. Cualquiera que las vea podrá creer indudablemente que mí rosa es igual que cualquiera de ustedes. Pero ella se sabe más importante que todas, porque yo la he regado, porque ha sido a ella a la que abrigué con el fanal, porque yo le maté los gusanos (salvo dos o tres que se hicieron mariposas ) y es a ella a la que yo he oído quejarse, alabarse y algunas veces hasta callarse. Porque es mi rosa, en fin.
Y volvió con el zorro.
-Adiós -le dijo.
-Adiós -dijo el zorro-. He aquí mi secreto, que no puede ser más simple : no se ve bien sino con el corazón; lo esencial es invisible para los ojos.
-Lo esencial es invisible para los ojos -repitió el principito para acordarse.
-Lo que hace más importante a tu rosa, es el tiempo que tú has perdido con ella.
-Es el tiempo que yo he perdido con ella... -repitió el principito para recordarlo.
-Los hombres han olvidado esta verdad -dijo el zorro-, pero tú no debes olvidarla. Eres responsable para siempre de lo que has domesticado. Eres responsable de tu rosa...
-Soy responsable de mi rosa... -repitió el principito a fin de recordarlo.
XXII
-¡Buenos días! -dijo el principito.
-¡Buenos días! -respondió el guardavías.
-¿Qué haces aquí? -le preguntó el principito.
-Formo con los viajeros paquetes de mil y despacho los trenes que los llevan, ya a la derecha, ya a la izquierda.
Y un tren rápido iluminado, rugiendo como el trueno, hizo temblar la cabina del guardavías.
-Tienen mucha prisa -dijo el principito-. ¿Qué buscan?
-Ni siquiera el conductor de la locomotora lo sabe -dijo el guardavías.
Un segundo rápido iluminado rugió en sentido inverso.
-¿Ya vuelve? -preguntó el principito.
-No son los mismos -contestó el guardavías-. Es un cambio.
-¿No se sentían contentos donde estaban?
-Nunca se siente uno contento donde está -respondió el guardavías.
Y rugió el trueno de un tercer rápido iluminado.
-¿Van persiguiendo a los primeros viajeros? -preguntó el principito.
-No persiguen absolutamente nada -le dijo el guardavías-; duermen o bostezan allí dentro. Únicamente los niños aplastan su nariz contra los vidrios.
-Únicamente los niños saben lo que buscan -dijo el principito. Pierden el tiempo con una muñeca de trapo que viene a ser lo más importante para ellos y si se la quitan, lloran...
-¡Qué suerte tienen! -dijo el guardavías.
XXIII
-¡Buenos días! -dijo el principito.
-¡Buenos días! -respondió el comerciante.
Era un comerciante de píldoras perfeccionadas que quitan la sed. Se toma una por semana y ya no se sienten ganas de beber.
-¿Por qué vendes eso? -preguntó el principito.
-Porque con esto se economiza mucho tiempo. Según el cálculo hecho por los expertos, se ahorran cincuenta y tres minutos por semana.
-¿Y qué se hace con esos cincuenta y tres minutos?
-Lo que cada uno quiere... "
"Si yo dispusiera de cincuenta y tres minutos -pensó el principito- caminaría muy suavemente hacia una fuente..."
El Principito
XXIV
Era el octavo día de mi avería en el desierto y había escuchado la historia del comerciante bebiendo la última gota de mi provisión de agua.
-¡Ah -le dije al principito-, son muy bonitos tus cuentos, pero yo no he reparado mi avión, no tengo nada para beber y yo también sería feliz si pudiera caminar muy suavemente hacia una fuente!
-Mi amigo el zorro..., me dijo...
-Mi pequeño hombrecito, ¡ya no se trata más del zorro!
-¿Por qué?
-Porque nos vamos a morir de sed...
No comprendió mi razonamiento y replicó:
-Es bueno haber tenido un amigo, aún si vamos a morir. Yo estoy muy contento de haber tenido un amigo zorro.
"No mide el peligro -me dije- Nunca tiene hambre ni sed. Un poco de sol le basta..."
El principito me miró y respondió a mi pensamiento:
-Tengo sed también... vamos a buscar un pozo...
Tuve un gesto de cansancio; es absurdo buscar un pozo, al azar, en la inmensidad del desierto. Sin embargo, nos pusimos en marcha.
Después de dos horas de caminar en silencio, cayó la noche y las estrellas comenzaron a brillar. Yo las veía como en sueño, pues a causa de la sed tenía un poco de fiebre. Las palabras del principito danzaban en mi mente.
-¿También tú tienes sed? -le pregunté. Pero no respondió a mi pregunta, diciéndome simplemente:
-El agua puede ser buena también para el corazón...
No comprendí sus palabras, pero me callé; sabía muy bien que no había que interrogarlo.
El principito estaba cansado y se sentó; yo me senté a su lado y después de un silencio me dijo:
-Las estrellas son hermosas, por una flor que no se ve...
Respondí "seguramente" y miré sin hablar los pliegues que la arena formaba bajo la luna.
-El desierto es bello -añadió el principito.
Era verdad; siempre me ha gustado el desierto. Puede uno sentarse en una duna, nada se ve, nada se oye y sin embargo, algo resplandece en el silencio...
-Lo que más embellece al desierto -dijo el principito- es el pozo que oculta en algún sitio...
Me quedé sorprendido al comprender súbitamente ese misterioso resplandor de la arena. Cuando yo era niño vivía en una casa antigua en la que, según la leyenda, había un tesoro escondido. Sin duda que nadie supo jamás descubrirlo y quizás nadie lo buscó, pero parecía toda encantada por ese tesoro. Mi casa ocultaba un secreto en el fondo de su corazón...
-Sí -le dije al principito- ya se trate de la casa, de las estrellas o del desierto, lo que les embellece es invisible.
-Me gusta -dijo el principito- que estés de acuerdo con mi zorro.
Como el principito se dormía, lo tomé en mis brazos y me puse nuevamente en camino. Me sentía emocionado llevando aquel frágil tesoro, y me parecía que nada más frágil había sobre la Tierra. Miraba a la luz de la luna aquella frente pálida, aquellos ojos cerrados, los cabellos agitados por el viento y me decía : "lo que veo es sólo la corteza; lo más importante es invisible... "
Como sus labios entreabiertos esbozaron una sonrisa, me dije: "Lo que más me emociona de este principito dormido es su fidelidad a una flor, es la imagen de la rosa que resplandece en él como la llama de una lámpara, incluso cuando duerme... " Y lo sentí más frágil aún. Pensaba que a las lámparas hay que protegerlas: una racha de viento puede apagarlas...
Continué caminando y al rayar el alba descubrí el pozo.
XXV
-Los hombres -dijo el principito- se meten en los rápidos pero no saben dónde van ni lo que quieren. . . Entonces se agitan y dan vueltas...
Y añadió:
-¡No vale la pena!...
El pozo que habíamos encontrado no se parecía en nada a los pozos saharianos. Estos pozos son simples agujeros que se abren en la arena. El que teníamos ante nosotros parecía el pozo de un pueblo; pero por allí no había ningún pueblo y me parecía estar soñando.
-¡Es extraño! -le dije al principito-. Todo está a punto: la roldana, el balde y la cuerda...
Se rió y tocó la cuerda; hizo mover la roldana. Y la roldana gimió como una vieja veleta cuando el viento ha dormido mucho.
El Principito
-¿Oyes? -dijo el principito-. Hemos despertado al pozo y canta.
No quería que el principito hiciera el menor esfuerzo y le dije:
-Déjame a mí, es demasiado pesado para ti.
Lentamente subí el cubo hasta el brocal donde lo dejé bien seguro. En mis oídos sonaba aún el canto de la roldana y veía temblar al sol en el agua agitada.
-Tengo sed de esta agua -dijo el principito-, dame de beber...
¡Comprendí entonces lo que él había buscado!
Levanté el balde hasta sus labios y el principito bebió con los ojos cerrados. Todo era bello como una fiesta. Aquella agua era algo más que un alimento. Había nacido del caminar bajo las estrellas, del canto de la roldana, del esfuerzo de mis brazos. Era como un regalo para el corazón. Cuando yo era niño, las luces del árbol de Navidad, la música de la misa de medianoche, la dulzura de las sonrisas, daban su resplandor a mi regalo de Navidad.
-Los hombres de tu tierra -dijo el principito- cultivan cinco mil rosas en un jardín y no encuentran lo que buscan.
-No lo encuentran nunca -le respondí. -Y sin embargo, lo que buscan podrían encontrarlo en una sola rosa o en un poco de agua...
-Sin duda, respondí. Y el principito añadió:
-Pero los ojos son ciegos. Hay que buscar con el corazón.
Yo había bebido y me encontraba bien. La arena, al alba, era color de miel, del que gozaba hasta sentirme dichoso. ¿Por qué había de sentirme triste?
-Es necesario que cumplas tu promesa -dijo dulcemente el principito que nuevamente se había sentado junto a mi.
-¿Qué promesa?
-Ya sabes... el bozal para mi cordero... soy responsable de mi flor.
Saqué del bolsillo mis esbozos de dibujo. El principito los miró y dijo riendo:
-Tus baobabs parecen repollos...
-¡Oh! ¡Y yo que estaba tan orgulloso de mis baobabs!
-Tu zorro tiene orejas que parecen cuernos; son demasiado largas.
Y volvió a reír.
-Eres injusto, muchachito; yo no sabía dibujar más que boas cerradas y boas abiertas.
-¡Oh, todo se arreglará! -dijo el principito-. Los niños entienden.
Dibujé, pues, un bozal. Y sentí el corazón oprimido cuando se lo di.
- Tienes proyectos que ignoro...
Pero no me respondió y me dijo:
-¿Sabes? -me dijo-. Mañana hace un año de mi caída en la Tierra...
Y después de un silencio, añadió:
-Caí muy cerca de aquí...
El principito se sonrojó y nuevamente, sin comprender por qué, experimenté una extraña tristeza.
Sin embargo, se me ocurrió preguntar:
-Entonces no te encontré por azar hace ocho días, cuando paseabas por estos lugares, a mil millas de distancia del lugar habitado más próximo. ¿Es que volvías al punto de tu caída?
El principito enrojeció nuevamente.
Y añadí vacilante.
-¿Tal vez por el aniversario?
El principito se ruborizó una vez más. Aunque nunca respondía a las preguntas, su rubor significaba una respuesta afirmativa.
-¡Ah! -le dije- tengo miedo.
Pero él me respondió:
-Debes trabajar ahora. Debes volver junto a tu máquina. Te espero aquí. Vuelve mañana por la tarde.
Pero yo no estaba tranquilo y me acordaba del zorro. Si uno se deja domesticar, corre el riesgo de llorar un poco...
XXVI
Al lado del pozo había una ruina de un viejo muro de piedras. Cuando volví de mi trabajo al día siguiente por la tarde, vi desde lejos al principito sentado en lo alto con las piernas colgando. Lo oí que hablaba.
-¿No te acuerdas? ¡No es aquí con exactitud!
Alguien le respondió sin duda, porque él replicó:
-¡Sí, sí; es el día, pero no es este el lugar!
Proseguí mi marcha hacia el muro, pero no veía ni oía a nadie. Y sin embargo, el principito replicó de nuevo.
-¡Claro! Ya verás dónde comienza mi huella en la arena. No tienes más que esperarme, que allí estaré yo esta noche.
Yo estaba a veinte metros y continuaba sin distinguir nada.
El principito, después de un silencio, dijo aún:
-¿Tienes un buen veneno? ¿Estás segura de no hacerme sufrir mucho?
Me detuve con el corazón oprimido, siempre sin comprender.
-¡Ahora vete -dijo el principito-, quiero volver a bajarme!
El Principito
Dirigí la mirada hacia el pie del muro e instintivamente di un brinco. Una serpiente de esas amarillas que matan a una persona en menos de treinta segundos, se erguía en dirección al principito. Echando mano al bolsillo para sacar mi revólver, apreté el paso, pero, al ruido que hice, la serpiente se dejó deslizar suavemente por la arena como un surtidor que muere, y, sin apresurarse demasiado, se escurrió entre las piedras con un ligero ruido metálico.
Llegué junto al muro a tiempo de recibir en mis brazos a mi principito, que estaba blanco como la nieve.
-¿Pero qué historia es ésta? ¿De charla también con las serpientes?
Le quité su eterna bufanda de oro, le humedecí las sienes y le di de beber, sin atreverme a hacerle pregunta alguna. Me miró gravemente rodeándome el cuello con sus brazos. Sentí latir su corazón, como el de un pajarillo que muere a tiros de carabina.
-Me alegra -dijo el principito- que hayas encontrado lo que faltaba a tu máquina. Así podrás volver a tu tierra...
-¿Cómo lo sabes?
Precisamente venía a comunicarle que, a pesar de que no lo esperaba, había logrado terminar mi trabajo.
No respondió a mi pregunta, sino que añadió:
-También yo vuelvo hoy a mi planeta...
Luego, con melancolía:
-Es mucho más lejos... y más difícil...
Me daba cuenta de que algo extraordinario pasaba en aquellos momentos. Estreché al principito entre mis brazos como sí fuera un niño pequeño, y no obstante, me pareció que descendía en picada hacia un abismo sin que fuera posible hacer nada para retenerlo.
Su mirada, seria, estaba perdida en la lejanía.
-Tengo tu cordero y la caja para el cordero. Y tengo también el bozal.
Y sonreía melancólicamente.
Esperé un buen rato. Sentía que volvía a entrar en calor poco a poco:
-Has tenido miedo, hombrecito...
Lo había tenido, sin duda, pero sonrió con dulzura:
-Esta noche voy a tener más miedo...
Me quedé de nuevo helado por un sentimiento de algo irreparable. Comprendí que no podía soportar la idea de no volver a oír nunca más su risa. Era para mí como una fuente en el desierto.
-Hombrecito, quiero oír otra vez tu risa...
Pero él me dijo:
-Esta noche hará un año. Mi estrella se encontrará precisamente encima del lugar donde caí el año pasado...
El Principito
-¿No es cierto -le interrumpí- que toda esta historia de serpientes, de citas y de estrellas es tan sólo una pesadilla?
Pero el principito no respondió a mi pregunta y dijo:
-Lo más importante nunca se ve...
-Indudablemente...
-Es lo mismo que la flor. Si te gusta una flor que habita en una estrella, es muy dulce mirar al cielo por la noche. Todas las estrellas han florecido.
-Es indudable...
-Es como el agua. La que me diste a beber, gracias a la roldana y la cuerda, era como una música ¿te acuerdas? ¡Qué buena era!
-Sí, cierto...
-Por la noche mirarás las estrellas; mi casa es demasiado pequeña para que yo pueda señalarte dónde se encuentra. Así es mejor; mi estrella será para ti una cualquiera de ellas. Te gustará entonces mirar todas las estrellas. Todas ellas serán tus amigas. Y además, te haré un regalo...
Y rió una vez más.
-¡Ah, hombrecito, hombrecito, cómo me gusta oír tu risa!
-Mi regalo será ése precisamente, será como el agua...
-¿Qué quieres decir?
La gente tiene estrellas que no son las mismas. Para los que viajan, las estrellas son guías; para otros sólo son pequeñas lucecitas. Para los sabios las estrellas son problemas. Para mi hombre de negocios, eran oro. Pero todas esas estrellas se callan. Tú tendrás estrellas como nadie las ha tenido...
-¿Qué quieres decir? -Cuando por las noches mires al cielo, al pensar que en una de aquellas estrellas estoy yo riendo, será para ti como si todas las estrellas riesen. ¡Tú tendrás estrellas que saben reír!
Y rió nuevamente.
-Cuando te hayas consolado (siempre se consuela uno) estarás contento de haberme conocido. Serás mi amigo y tendrás ganas de reír conmigo. Algunas veces abrirás tu ventana sólo por placer y tus amigos quedarán asombrados de verte reír mirando al cielo. Tú les explicarás: "Las estrellas me hacen reír siempre". Ellos te creerán loco. Y yo te habré jugado una mala pasada...
Y se rió otra vez.
-Será como si en vez de estrellas, te hubiese dado multitud de cascabelitos que saben reír...
Una vez más dejó oír su risa y luego se puso serio.
-Esta noche ¿sabes? no vengas...
-No me separaré de ti.
-Parecerá que sufro... Parecerá un poco que me muero. Es así. No vengas a verlo, no vale la pena...
-No me separaré de ti.
Pero estaba preocupado.
-Te digo esto... también por la serpiente. No debe morderte... Las serpientes son malas. Pueden morder por placer...
-He dicho que no me separaré de ti.
Pero algo lo tranquilizó.
-Bien es verdad que no tienen veneno para la segunda mordedura...
El Principito
Aquella noche no lo vi ponerse en camino. Cuando le alcancé marchaba con paso rápido y decidido y me dijo solamente:
-¡Ah, estás ahí!
Me cogió de la mano y todavía se atormentó:
-Has hecho mal. Tendrás pena. Parecerá que estoy muerto, pero no es verdad.
Yo me callaba.
-¿Comprendes? Es demasiado lejos. No puedo llevar mi cuerpo allí. Es demasiado pesado.
Seguí callado.
-Será como una corteza vieja que se abandona. No son tristes las viejas cortezas...
Yo me callaba. El principito perdió un poco de ánimo. Pero hizo un esfuerzo y dijo:
-Será agradable ¿sabes? Yo miraré también las estrellas. Todas serán pozos con roldana enmohecida. Todas las estrellas me darán de beber.
Yo callaba.
-¡Será tan divertido! Tú tendrás quinientos millones de cascabeles y yo quinientos millones de fuentes...
El principito se calló también por que lloraba.
-Es allí; déjame ir solo.
Se sentó porque tenía miedo. Dijo aún:
-¿Sabes?... mi flor... soy responsable... ¡y ella es tan débil y tan inocente! Sólo tiene cuatro espinas insignificantes para defenderse contra todo el mundo...
Me senté, ya no podía mantenerme en pie.
-Bien... eso es todo...
Vaciló todavía un instante, luego se levantó y dio un paso. Yo no pude moverme.
Un relámpago amarillo centelleó en su tobillo. Quedó un instante inmóvil, sin exhalar un grito. Luego cayó lentamente como cae un árbol, sin hacer el menor ruido en la arena.
XXVII
Ahora hace ya seis años de esto. Jamás he contado esta historia y los compañeros que me vuelven a ver se alegran de encontrarme vivo. Estaba triste, pero yo les decía: "Es el cansancio".
Ahora me he consolado un poco. Es decir... no del todo. Pero sé que verdaderamente volvió a su planeta, pues, al nacer el día, no encontré su cuerpo. Y no era un cuerpo tan pesado... Y por la noche me gusta oír las estrellas. Son como quinientos millones de cascabeles...
Pero sucede algo extraordinario. Al bozal que dibujé para el principito se me olvidó añadirle la correa de cuero; no habrá podido atárselo al cordero. Entonces me pregunto:
"¿Qué habrá sucedido en su planeta? Quizá el cordero se ha comido la flor..."
El Principito
A veces me digo: "¡Seguro que no! El príncipito cubre la flor con su globo de vidrio todas las noches y vigila bien a su cordero". Entonces me siento dichoso y todas las estrellas ríen dulcemente.
Pero otras veces pienso: "Alguna que otra vez se distrae uno y eso basta. Si una noche ha olvidado poner el globo de vidrio o el cordero ha salido sin hacer ruido, durante la noche...". Y entonces los cascabeles se convierten en lágrimas...
Y ahí está el gran misterio. Para vosotros que también amáis al principito, como para mí, nada en el universo sigue siendo igual si en alguna parte, quien sabe dónde, un cordero desconocido se ha comido o no se ha comido una rosa...
Pero mirad al cielo y preguntad: el cordero ¿se ha comido la flor? Y veréis cómo todo cambia...
¡Ninguna persona mayor comprenderá jamás que esto sea verdaderamente importante!
El Principito
Este es para mí el paisaje más hermoso y el más triste del mundo. Es el mismo paisaje de la página anterior que he dibujado una vez más para que lo vean bien. Fue aquí donde el principito apareció sobre la Tierra, desapareciendo luego.
Mirad atentamente este paisaje para que sepáis reconocerlo, si viajáis algún día por el África, en el desierto. Si por casualidad llegáis a pasar por allí, os suplico, no os apresuréis; esperad un momento, exactamente debajo de la estrella. Si entonces un niño llega hacia vosotros, si este niño ríe y tiene cabellos de oro y nunca responde a vuestras preguntas, adivinaréis en seguida quién es. ¡Sed amables entonces! No me dejéis tan triste. Escribidme enseguida, decidme que el principito ha vuelto...